Chapter 22
Register Allocation

Florent Bouchez Tichadou and Fabrice Rastello

Register allocation maps the variables of a program to physical memory locations:
usually either CPU registers or the main memory. The compiler determines the
location for each variable and each program point. Ideally, as many operations as
possible should draw their operands from processor registers without loading them
from memory beforehand. As there is only a small number of registers available in a
CPU (with usual values ranging from 8 to 128), it is usually not possible to only use
registers, and the task of register allocation is also to decide which variables should
be evicted from registers and at which program points to store and load them from
memory (spilling).
   Furthermore, register allocation has to remove spurious copy instructions (copy
coalescing) inserted by previous phases in the compilation process and to deal with
allocation restrictions that the instruction set architecture and the run time system
impose (register targeting). Classical register allocation algorithms address those
different issues with either complex and sometimes expensive schemes (usually
graph-based) or simpler and faster (but less efficient) algorithms such as linear scan.
   The goal of this chapter is to illustrate how SSA form can help in designing both
simpler and faster schemes with similar or even better quality than the most complex
existing ones.

F. Bouchez Tichadou
University of Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France
e-mail: florent.bouchez-tichadou@imag.fr
F. Rastello (?)
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022    303
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_22

22.1 Introduction

Let us first review the basics of register allocation, to help us understand the choices
made by graph-based and linear scan style allocations.
    Register allocation is usually performed per procedure. In each procedure, a
liveness analysis (see Chap. 9) determines for each variable the program points
where the variable is live. The set of all program points where a variable is live
is called the live range of the variable, and all along this live range, storage needs
to be allocated for that variable, ideally a register. When two variables “exist” at the
same time, they are conflicting for resources, i.e., they cannot reside in the same
location.
    This resource conflict of two variables is called interference and is usually
defined via liveness: two variables interfere if (and only if) there exists a program
point where they are simultaneously live, i.e., their live ranges intersect.1 It
represents the fact that those two variables cannot share the same register. For
instance, in Fig. 22.1, variables a and b interfere as a is live at the definition of b.

22.1.1 Questions for Register Allocators

There are multiple questions that arise at that point that a register allocator has to
answer to:
• Are there enough registers for all my variables? (spill test)
• If yes, how do I choose which register to assign to which variable? (assignment)
• If no, how do I choose which variables to store in memory? (spilling)
    Without going into the details, let us see how linear scan and graph-based
allocators handle these questions. Figure 22.1 will be used in the next paragraphs to
illustrate how these allocators work.
Linear Scan
The linear scan principle is to consider that a procedure is a long basic block
and, hence, live ranges are approximated as intervals. For instance, the procedure
shown in Fig. 22.1b is viewed as the straight-line code of Fig. 22.1a. The algorithm
then proceeds in scanning the block from top to bottom. When encountering
the definition of a variable (i.e., the beginning of a live range), we check if
some registers are free (spill test). If yes, we pick one to assign the variable to
(assignment). If no, we choose from the set of currently live variables the one that

1 This definition of interference by liveness is an over-approximation (see Sect. 2.6 of Chap. 2), and

there are refined definitions that create less interferences (see Chap. 21). However, in this chapter,
we will restrict ourselves to this definition and assume that two variables whose live ranges intersect
cannot be assigned the same register.

          Linear scan                        Graph-based                      Interference graph

Fig. 22.1 Linear scan makes an over-approximation of live ranges as intervals, while graph-based
allocator creates an interference graph capturing the exact interferences. Linear scan requires 5
registers in this case, while colouring the interference graph can be done with 4 registers

has the farthest use and spill it (spilling). When we encounter the end of its live
range (e.g., a last use), we free the register it was assigned to. On our example,
we would thus greedily colour along the following order: p, a, b, x, and finally y.
When the scan encounters the first definition of y in the second basic block, four
other variables are live and a fifth colour is required to avoid spilling.
Graph-Based
Graph-based allocators, such as the “Iterated Register Coalescing” allocator (IRC),
represent interferences of variables as an undirected interference graph: the nodes
are the variables of the program, and two nodes are connected by an edge if they
interfere, i.e., if their live ranges intersect. For instance, Fig. 22.1c shows the
interference graph of the code example presented in Fig. 22.1b. In this model,
two neighbouring nodes must be assigned different registers, so the assignment
of variables to registers amounts to colouring the graph—two neighbouring nodes
must have a different colour—using at most R colours, the number of registers.2
   Here, the allocator will try to colour the graph. If it succeeds (spill test), then the
colouration represents a valid assignment of registers to variables (assignment). If
not, the allocator will choose some nodes (usually the ones with the highest number
of neighbours) and remove them from the graph by storing the corresponding
variables in memory (spilling).
   On our example, one would need to use four different colours for a, b, p, and x,
but y could use the same colour as a or b.

2 Hence, the terms “register” and “colour” will be used interchangeably in this chapter.

Comparison
Linear scan is a very fast allocator where a procedure is modelled as a straight-line
code. In this model, the colouring scheme is considered to be optimal. However, the
model itself is very imprecise: Procedures generally are not just straight-line codes
but involve complex flow structures such as if-conditions and loops. The live ranges
are artificially longer and produce more interferences than there actually are. If we
look again at the example Fig. 22.1, we have a simple code with an if-condition.
Linear scan would decide that, because four variables are live at the definition y ←
b, it needs five registers (spill test). But one can observe that a is actually not live
at that program point: Modelling the procedure as a straight-line code artificially
increases the live ranges of variables.
    On the other hand, a graph-based allocator has a much more precise notion
of interference. Unfortunately, graph k-colouring is known to be an NP-complete
problem. Control-flow structures create cycles in the interference graph that can get
arbitrarily complex. The allocator uses a heuristic for colouring the graph and will
base its spill decisions on this heuristic.
    In our example, IRC would create the graph depicted in Fig. 22.1c, which
includes a 4-clique (i.e., a complete sub-graph of size 4, here with variables a, b,
p, and x), and, hence, would require at least 4 colours. This simple graph would
actually be easily 4-colourable with a heuristic; hence, the spill test would succeed
with four registers.
    Still, one could observe that at each point of the procedure, no more than three
variables are simultaneously live. However, since x interferes with b on the left
branch and with a on the right branch, with the model used by IRC, it is indeed
impossible to use only three registers.
    The question we raise here is: can’t we do better? The answer is yes, as depicted
in Fig. 22.2a. If it was possible for x to temporarily use the same register as b in the
right branch as long as a lives (short live range denoted x in the figure), then x could
use the same colour as a (freed after a’s last use). In this context, three registers are
enough. In fact, one should expect that, for a code where only three variables are
live at any program point, it should be possible to register allocate without spilling
with only three registers and proper reshuffling of variables in registers from time
to time.
    So what is wrong with the graph colouring based scheme we just described?
We will develop below that its limitation is mostly due to the fact that it arbitrarily
enforces all variables to be assigned to only one register for their entire live range.
    In conclusion, linear scan allocators are faster, and graph colouring ones have
better results in practice, but both approaches have an inexact spill test: linear
scan has artificial interferences, and graph colouring uses a colouring heuristic.
Moreover, both require variables to be assigned to exactly one register for all their
live ranges. This means both allocators will potentially spill more variables than
strictly necessary. We will see how SSA can help with this problem.

              Splitting variable x                                   SSA version

Fig. 22.2 Splitting variable x in the previous example breaks the interference between x and a.
By using copies between x/x and y/a in parallel, now only 3 registers are required on the left.
SSA introduces splitting that guarantees Maxlive registers are enough

22.1.2 Maxlive and Variable Splitting

The number of simultaneously live variables at a program point is called the register
pressure at that program point.3 The maximum register pressure over all program
points in a procedure is called the register pressure of that procedure, or “Maxlive.”
One can observe that Maxlive expresses the minimum number of required registers
for a spill-free register assignment, i.e., an allocation that does not require memory.
For instance, in Fig. 22.1b, Maxlive = 3, so a minimum number of 3 registers is
required. If a procedure is restricted to a single basic block (straight-line code), then
Maxlive also constitutes a sufficient number of registers for a spill-free assignment.
But in general, a procedure is made of several basic blocks, and under the standard
model described so far, an allocation might require more than Maxlive registers to
be spill-free.
   This situation changes if we permit live range splitting. This means inserting a
variable-to-variable copy instruction at a program point that creates a new version
of a variable. Thus, the value of a variable is allowed to reside in different registers
at different times. For instance, in Fig. 22.1b, we can split x in the right branch
by changing the definition to x and using a copy x ← x at the end of the block,
producing the code shown in Fig. 22.2a. It means the node x in the graph is split into
two nodes, x and x . Those nodes do not interfere, and also interfere differently with
the other variables: Now, x can use the same register as a because only x interferes
with a. Conversely, x can use the same register as b, because only x interferes with
b. In this version, we only need Maxlive = 3 registers, which means that, if the

3 See Fig. 13.1 of Chap. 13 for a visualization of program points.

number of registers was tight (i.e., R = 3), we have traded a spill (here one store
and one load) for one copy, which is an excellent bargain.
   This interplay between live range splitting and colourability is one of the key
issues in register allocation, and we will see in the remainder of this chapter how
SSA, which creates live range splitting at particular locations, can play a role in
register allocation.

22.1.3 The Spill Test Under SSA

As said above, a register allocation scheme needs to address the following three
sub-problems: spill test, assignment, and spilling. We focus here on the spill test,
that is, verify whether there are enough registers for all variables without having to
store any of them in memory.
   As already mentioned in Sect. 2.3 of Chap. 2, the live ranges in an SSA-
form program with dominance property have interesting structural properties:
In that flavour, SSA requires that all uses of a variable are dominated by its
definition. Hence, the whole live range is dominated by the definition of the variable.
Dominance, however, induces a tree on the control-flow graph (see for instance the
dominance edges of Fig. 4.1 in Chap. 4). Thus, the live ranges of SSA variables
are all tree-shaped. They can branch downward on the dominance tree but have a
single root: the program point where the variable is defined. Hence, a situation like
in Fig. 22.1 can no longer occur: x and y had two “roots” because they were defined
twice. Under SSA form, the live ranges of those variables are split by φ-functions,
which creates the code shown in Fig. 22.2b, where we can see that live ranges form
a “tree.” The argument and result variables of the φ-functions constitute new live
ranges, giving more freedom to the register allocator since they can be assigned to
different registers.
   This structural property is interesting as we can now perform exact polynomial
colouring schemes that work both for graph-based and linear-style allocators.
Graph-Based
Graph-based allocators such as the IRC mentioned above use a simplification
scheme that works quite well in practice but is a heuristic for colouring general
graphs. We will explain it in more detail in Sect. 22.3.1, but the general idea is to
remove from the interference graph nodes that have strictly less than R neighbours,
as there will always be a colour available for them. If the whole graph can be
simplified, nodes are given a colour in the reverse order of their simplification. We
also call this method the greedy colouring scheme. On our running example, the
interference graph of Fig. 22.1c, candidates for simplification with R = 4 would
be nodes with strictly less than 4 neighbours, that is, a, b, or y. As soon as one of
them is simplified (removed from the graph), p and x now have only 3 neighbours
and can also be simplified. So a possible order would be to simplify a, then y, p,
b, and finally x. Colours can be greedily assigned during the reinsertion of nodes in

the graph in reverse order, starting from x, and ending with a: When we colour a,
all its 3 neighbours already have a colour and we assign it to the fourth colour.
    Interestingly, under SSA, the interference graph becomes a chordal graph.4 The
important nice property about chordal graphs is that they can be coloured minimally
in polynomial time. Even more interesting is the fact that the simplification scheme
used in IRC is optimal for such graphs and will always manage to colour it with
Maxlive colours! Thus the same colouring algorithm can be used, without any
modification, and now becomes an exact spill test: Spilling is required if and only if
the simplification scheme fails to completely simplify (hence, colour) the graph.

Tree Scan (Linear Style)

 Algorithm 22.1: Tree scan
   Input: T , program points in order of the dominance tree
   Output: color, an assignment of live ranges to registers
 1 Function assign_color (p, available)
 2     foreach v last use at p do
 3          available[color(v)] ← True                                 ? colors not used anymore
 4       foreach v defined at p do
 5           c ← choose_color(v, available)                     ? pick one of the available colors
 6           available[c] ← False
 7           color(v) ← c
 8       foreach child p of p do
 9           assign_color(p , copy of available)

10   assign_color(root(T), [True, True, . . . , True ])
11   return color

Under SSA, the live ranges are intervals that can “branch” but never “join.” This
allows for a simple generalization of the linear scan mentioned above that we call the
tree scan. As we will see, the tree scan always succeeds in colouring the tree-shaped
live ranges with Maxlive colours. This greedy assignment scans the dominance tree,
colouring the variables from the root to the leaves in a top-down order. This means
the variables are simply coloured in the order of appearance of their respective
definition. On our example (Fig. 22.2b), tree scan would colour the variables in
the following order: p1 , a1 , b1 , x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , x3 , y3 . This works because branches
of the tree are independent, so colouring one will not add constraints on other parts
of the tree, contrary to the general non-SSA case that may expose cycles.
   The pseudo-code of the tree scan is shown in Algorithm 22.1. In this pseudo-
code, the program points p are processed using a depth-first search traversal of the
dominance tree T . For a colour c, available[c] is a boolean that expresses if c is

4 In a chordal graph, also called a triangulated graph, every cycle of length 4 or more has (at least)

one chord (i.e., an edge joining two non-consecutive edges in the cycle).

available for the currently processed point. Intuitively, when the scanning arrives at
the definition of a variable, the only already coloured variables are “above” it, and
since there is at most Maxlive − 1, other variables live at this program point, and
there is always a free colour. As an example, when colouring x1 , the variables live at
its definition point are p1 and b and are already coloured. So a third colour, different
from the ones assigned to p1 and b, can be given to x1 .
Conclusion
The direct consequence is that, as opposed to general form programs, and whether
we consider graph-based or scan-based allocators, the only case where spilling is
required is when Maxlive > R, i.e., when the maximum number of simultaneously
live variables is greater than the number of available registers. In other words, there
is no need to try to colour the interference graph to check if spilling is necessary or
not: the spill test for SSA-form programs simplifies to simply computing Maxlive
and then comparing it to R.
    This allows to design a register allocation scheme where spilling is decoupled
from colouring: First, lower the register pressure to at most R everywhere in the
program. Then, colour the interference graph with R colours in polynomial time.

22.2 Spilling

We have seen previously that, under SSA, it is easy to decide in polynomial time
whether there is enough registers or not, simply by checking if Maxlive ≤ R,
the number of registers. The goal of this section is to present algorithms that will
lower the register pressure when it is too high, i.e., when Maxlive > R, by spilling
(assigning) some variables to memory.
    Spilling is handled differently depending on the allocator used. For a scan-based
allocator, the spilling decision happens when we are at a particular program point.
Although it is actually a bit more complex, the idea when spilling a variable v is
to insert a store at that point, and a load just before its next use. This process leads
to spilling only a part of the live range. On the other end, a graph-based allocator
has no notion of program points since the interferences have been combined in an
abstract structure: the interference graph. In the graph colouring setting, spilling
means removing a node of the interference graph and thus the entire live range of
a variable. This is a called a spill-everywhere strategy, which implies inserting load
instructions in front of every use and storing instructions after each definition of the
variables. These loads and stores require temporary variables that were not present
in the initial graph. These temporary variables also need to be assigned to registers.
This implies that whenever the spilling/colouring is done, the interference graph
has to be rebuilt and a new pass of allocation is triggered, until no variable is spilled
anymore: this is where the “Iterated” comes from in the IRC name.
    In this section, we will consider the two approaches: the graph-based approach
with a spill-everywhere scheme, and the scan-based approach that allows partial live

range spilling. In both cases, we will assume that the program was in SSA before
spilling. This is important to notice that there are pros and cons of assuming so.
In particular, the inability to coalesce or move the shuffle code associated to φ-
functions can lead to spurious load and store instructions on CFG edges. Luckily,
these can be handled by a post-pass of partial redundancy elimination (PRE, see
Chap. 11), and we will consider here the spilling phase as a full-fledged SSA
program transformation.
   Suppose we have R registers, the objective is to establish Maxlive ≤ R (Maxlive
lowering) by inserting loads and stores into the program. Indeed, as stated above,
lowering Maxlive to R ensures that a register allocation with R registers can be
found in polynomial time for SSA programs. Thus, spilling should take place before
registers are assigned and yield a program in SSA form. In such a decoupled register
allocation scheme, the spilling phase is an optimization problem for which we define
the following constraints and objective function:
• The constraints that describe the universe of possible solutions express that the
  resulting code should be R-colourable.
• The objective function expresses the fact that the (weighted) amount of inserted
  loads and stores should be minimized.
   The constraints directly reflect the “spill test” that expresses whether more
spilling is necessary or not. The objective is expressed with the profitability test:
among all variables, which one is more profitable to spill? The main implication of
spilling in SSA programs is that the spill test—which amounts to checking whether
Maxlive has been lowered to R or not—becomes precise.
   The other related implication of the use of SSA form follows from this
observation: consider a variable such that for any program point in its entire live
range the register pressure is at most R, and then spilling this variable is useless
with regard to the colourability of the code. In other words, spilling such a variable
will never be profitable. We will call this yes-or-no criteria, enabled by the use of
SSA form, the “usefulness test.”
   We will see now how to choose, among all “useful” variables (with regard to
the colourability), the ones that seem most profitable. In this regard, we present
in the next section how SSA allows to better account for the program structure
in the spilling decision even in a graph-based allocator, thanks to the enabled
capability to decouple spilling (allocation) to colouring (assignment). However,
register allocation under SSA shines the most in a scan-based setting, and we present
guidelines to help the spill decisions in such a scheme in Sect. 22.2.2.

22.2.1 Graph-Based Approach

In a graph-based allocator such as the IRC, a spill-everywhere strategy is used: a
variable is either spilled completely or not at all, and loads are placed directly in
front of uses and stores directly after the definition. When spilled, the live range

of a variable then degenerates into small intervals: one from the definition and
the store, and one from each load to its subsequent use. However, even in this
simplistic setting, it is NP-complete to find the minimum number of nodes to
establish Maxlive ≤ R. In practice, heuristics such as the one in IRC spill variables
(graph nodes) greedily using a weight that takes into account its node degree (the
number of interfering uncoloured variables) and an estimated spill cost (estimated
execution frequency of inserted loads and stores). Good candidates are high-degree
nodes of low spill cost, as this means they will lessen colouring constraints on many
nodes—their neighbours—while inserting few spill codes.
   The node degree represents the profitability of spilling the node in terms of
colourability. It is not very precise as it is only a graph property, independent of the
control-flow graph. We can improve this criteria by using SSA to add a usefulness
tag. We will now show how to build this criteria and how to update it.
   We attach to each variable v a “useful” tag, an integer representing the number
of program points that would benefit from spilling v, i.e., v.useful expresses the
number of program points that belong to the live range of v and for which the register
pressure is strictly greater than R.
Building the “Useful” Criteria
We will now explain how the “useful” tag can be built at the same time as the
interference graph. Under SSA, the interference graph can be built through a simple
bottom-up traversal of the CFG. When encountering the last use of a variable p,
p is added to the set of currently live variables (live set) and a corresponding node
(that we also call p) is added in the graph. Arriving at the definition of p, it is
removed from the current live set, and edges (interferences) are added to the graph:
for all variables v in the live set, there is an edge (v → p). Note that, as opposed to
standard interference graphs, we consider directed edges here, where the direction
represents the dominance. At that point, we also associate the following fields to
node p and its interferences:
• p.pressure that corresponds to the number of variables live at the definition point
  of p, that is, |live-set| + 1
• (v → p).high, a boolean set to true if and only if p.pressure > R, meaning this
  interference belongs to a clique of size more than R
   We then create the “usefulness” field of p. If p.pressure ≤ R, then p.useful is
set to 0. Otherwise, we do the following:
• p.useful is set to 1.
• For all (v → p), v.useful gets incremented by 1.
   At the end of the build process, v.useful expresses the number of program points
that belong to the live range of v.var and for which the register pressure is greater
than R. More precisely,

               v.useful = |{p : (v → p) exists ∧ p.pressure > R}| .

   With this definition, if v.useful = 0, then it can be considered to be useless to
spill v, as it will not help in reducing the register pressure. If not, it means that v
belongs to this number of cliques of size greater than R. Since at least one of the
nodes of those cliques must be spilled, spilling v is useful as it would reduce the
size of each of those cliques by one. Existing colouring scheme such as the IRC can
be modified to use the useful tag when making spill decisions, the higher the better.
Updating the “useful” Criteria
Whenever a node n is spilled (assume only useful nodes are spilled), those additional
fields of the interference graph must be updated as follows:
1. If n.pressure > R, then for all its incoming edges (v → n), v.useful is
   decremented by one.
2. For all its outgoing edges (n → p) such that (n → p).high = true, p.pressure
   is decremented by one; if, following this decrement, p.pressure ≤ R; then for all
   the incoming edges (v → p) of p, v.useful is decremented by one.
Thoughts on Graph-Based Spilling
In an existing graph-based allocation, SSA can bring information to better help the
allocator in making its spill decisions. However, with the spilling and colouring
fully decoupled, encoding the information using a graph does not seem as pertinent.
Moreover, formulations like spill everywhere are often not appropriate for practical
purposes, as putting the whole live range to memory is too simplistic. A variable
might be spilled because at some program point the pressure is too high; however,
if that same variable is later used in a loop where the register pressure is low, a spill
everywhere will place a superfluous (and costly!) load in that loop. Spill-everywhere
approaches try to minimize this behaviour by adding costs to variables, to make the
spilling of such a variable less likely. These bring in a flow-insensitive information
that a variable resides in a frequently executed area, but such approximations are
often too coarse to give good performances. Hence, it is imperative to cleverly split
the live range of the variable according to the program structure and spill only parts
of it, which is why we prefer to recommend a scan-based approach of the register
allocation under SSA.

22.2.2 Scan-Based Approach

In the context of a basic block, a simple algorithm that gives good results is the
“furthest first” algorithm that is presented in Algorithm 22.2. The idea is to scan
the block from top to bottom: whenever the register pressure is too high, we will
spill the variable whose next use is the furthest away, and it is spilled only up to this
next use. In the evict function of Algorithm 22.2, this corresponds to maximizing
distance_to_next_use_after(p). Spilling this variable frees a register for the longest
time, hence diminishing the chances to have to spill other variables later. This
algorithm is not optimal because it does not take into account the fact that the

first time we spill a variable is more costly than subsequent spills of the same
variable (the first time, a store and a load are added, but only a load must be
added afterwards). However, the general problem is NP-complete, and this heuristic,
although it may produce more stores than necessary, gives good results on “straight-
line codes,” i.e., basic blocks.

 Algorithm 22.2: Furthest first spilling algorithm for straight-line code
   Input: B, the basic block to process
   Input: B.in_regs, the set of variables in registers at entry of B
 1 foreach program point p in B from top to bottom do
         uses of v must be in a register before p
 2     protected ← ∅
 3     foreach v used at p do
 4         if v ∈
                / B.in_regs then
 5              insert a load of v from memory just before p
 6              add v to B.in_regs
 7              add v to protected

 8      evict(p, B, protected)                                 ? need space for vars loaded at p
 9      foreach v last use at p do
10           remove v from B.in_regs
11      protected ← ∅
12      foreach v defined at p do
13          add v to B.in_regs
14          add v to protected
15      evict(p, B, protected)                                 ? need space for vars defined at p
16 Function evict (p, B, protected)
        remove variables from registers until there are enough registers
17    while |B.in_regs| > R do
18         let v ∈ (B.in_regs \ protected) with maximum v.distance_to_next_use_after(p)
19         if v ∈
                / B.in_mem then
20              insert a store of v to memory just before p
21              add v to B.in_mem
22          remove v from B.in_regs

   We now present an algorithm that extends this “furthest first” algorithm to
general control-flow graphs. The idea is to scan the CFG using a topological order
and greedily evict sub-live ranges whenever the register pressure is too high. There
are two main issues:
1. Generalize the priority function distance_to_next_use_after to a general CFG.
2. Find a way to initialize the “in_regs” set when starting to scan a basic block, in
   the situation where direct predecessor basic blocks have not been processed yet
   (e.g., at the entry of a loop).

Fig. 22.3 Generalization of
distance_to_next_use_after
for a CFG. Illustrating
example

Profitability to Spill
To illustrate the generalization of the further-first priority strategy to a CFG, let us
consider the example of Fig. 22.3. In this figure, the ? + n sign denotes regions with
(high) register pressure of R + n. At program point p0 , register pressure is too high
by one variable (suppose there are other hidden variables that we do not want to
spill). We have two candidates for spilling: x and y, and the classical furthest first
criteria would be different depending on the chosen branch:
• If the left branch is taken, considering an execution trace (AB 100 C): In this
  branch, the next use of y appears in a loop, while the next use of x appears way
  further, after the loop has fully executed. It is more profitable to evict variable x
  (at distance 101).
• If the right branch is taken, the execution trace is (AD). In that case, this is
  variable y that has the further use (at distance 2) so we would evict variable y.
   We have two opposing viewpoints, but looking at the example as a whole, we see
that the left branch is not under pressure, so spilling x would only help for program
point p0 , and one would need to spill another variable in block D (x is used at the
beginning of D); hence, it would be preferable to evict variable y.
   On the other hand, if we modify a little bit the example by assuming a
high register pressure within the loop at program point p1 (by introducing other
variables), then evicting variable x would be preferred in order to avoid a load and
store in a loop!
   This dictates the following remarks:
1. Program points with low register pressure can be ignored.
2. Program points within loops, or more generally with higher execution frequency,
   should account in the computation of the “distance” more than program points
   with lower execution frequency.

   We will then replace the notion of “distance” in the furthest first algorithm with
a notion of “profitability,” that is, a measure of the number of program points
(weighted by frequency) that would benefit from the spilling of a variable v.
Definition 22.1 (Spill Profitability from p) Let p be a program point and v a
variable live at p. Let v.HP(p) (high pressure) be the set of all program points q
such that: 1. Register pressure at q is strictly greater than R. 2. v is live at q. 3. There
exists a path from p to q that does not contain any use or definition of v. Then,

                                                    
                   v.spill_profitability(p) =               q.frequency.
                                                q∈v.HP(p)

   There is an important subtlety concerning the set of points in v.HP(p) that is
dependent on the instruction set architecture and the way spill code is inserted.
Consider in our example the set x.HP(p0 ), that is, the set of high-pressure points
that would benefit from the spilling of x at point p0 . The question is the following:
“does the point p3 (just before the instruction using x) belong to this set?” If the
architecture can have an operand in memory, p3 belongs to the set. However, if the
architecture requires an operand to be loaded in a register before its use, then x
would be reloaded at p3 so this point would not benefit from the spilling of x.
   Let us see how the profitability applies to our running example with two
scenarios: low pressure and high pressure in the B loop at program point p1 . We also
assume that an operand should be loaded in a register before its use. In particular,
p3 must be excluded from x.HP(p0 ).

                                             Low pressure at p1   High pressure at p1
                           Loop B                scenario              scenario
                         x.HP(p0 )                 {p0 }               {p0 , p1 }
       x.spill_profitability(p0 )                    1                    51
                         y.HP(p0 )               {p0 , p3 }            {p0 , p3 }
       y.spill_profitability(p0 )                   1.5                  1.5

   In the first scenario, we would evict y with a profitability of 1.5. In the second,
we would evict x with a profitability of 51 (plus another variable later, when arriving
at p3 ), which is the behaviour we wanted in the first place.
Initial Register Filling at the Beginning of a Basic Block
When visiting basic block B, the set of variables that must reside in a register is
stored in B.in_regs. For each basic block, the initial value of this set has to be
computed before we start processing it. The heuristic for computing this set is
different for a “regular” basic block and for a loop entry. For a regular basic block,

as we assume a topological order traversal of the CFG, all its direct predecessors
will have been processed. Live-in variables fall into three sets:
1. The ones that are available at the exit of all direct predecessor basic blocks:
                                                      
                       allpreds_in_regs =                        P .in_regs
                                              P ∈directpred(B)

2. The ones that are available in some of the direct predecessor basic blocks:

                     somepreds_in_regs =                          P .in_regs
                                               P ∈directpred(B)

3. The ones that are available in none of them.
   As detailed in Algorithm 22.3, B.in_regs is initialized with
allpreds_in_regs plus, as space allows, elements of somepreds_in_regs
sorted in decreasing order of their spill_profitability metric. Note that
this will add shuffle code (here, loads) on the previous basic blocks or on the
corresponding incoming edges that are critical. In practice, this can be handled in a
post-pass, in a similar fashion as during the SSA destruction presented in Chap. 21:
indeed, lowering the φ-functions will create shuffle code that must be executed prior
to entering the basic block.

 Algorithm 22.3: Initial value of B.in_regs for a regular basic block
   Input: B, the basic block
                          to process
 1 allpreds_in_regs ← P ∈directpred(B) P .in_regs
                            
 2 somepreds_in_regs ←       P ∈directpred(B) P .in_regs
 3 B.in_regs ← allpreds_in_regs
 4 while |B.in_regs| < R and |somepreds_in_regs| > |B.in_regs| do
 5      let v ∈ (somepreds_in_regs \ B.in_regs) with mininum v.spill_profitability(B.entry)
 6      add v to B.in_regs

   For a basic block at the entry of a loop, as illustrated by the example of Fig. 22.4,
one does not want to account for allocation on the direct predecessor basic block but
starts from scratch instead. Here, we assume the first basic block has already been
processed, and one wants to compute B.in_regs:
1. Example (a): Even if at the end of the direct predecessor basic block, at p0 , x is
   not available in a register, one wants to insert a reload of x at p1 , that is, include
   x in B.in_regs. Not doing so would involve a reload at every iteration of the loop
   at p2 .
2. Example (b): Even if at the entry of the loop, x is available in a register, one
   wants to spill it at p1 and restore at p4 so as to lower the register pressure that

Fig. 22.4 Initial values of B.in_regs at loop entry. Illustrating examples

     is too high within the loop. Not doing so would involve a store in the loop at p2
     and a reload on the back edge of the loop at p3 . This means excluding x from
     B.in_regs.
This leads to Algorithm 22.4 where B.livein represents the set of live-in
variables of B and L.Maxlive is the maximal register pressure in the whole loop
L. Init_inregs first fills B.in_regs with live-in variables that are used within
the loop L. Then, we add live-through variables to B.in_regs, but only those
that can survive the loop: If L.Maxlive > R, then L.Maxlive − R variables
will have to be spilled (hopefully some live-through variables), so no more than
|B.livein| − (L.Maxlive − R) are allocated to a register at the entry of B.

 Algorithm 22.4: Initial value of B.in_regs at the entry of a loop L
 1 B.in_regs ← ∅
 2 while
      |B.in_regs| < R and
 3    |B.livein| > |B.in_regs| and
      |B.in_regs| < R + |B.livein| − L.Maxlive
 4 do
 5     let v ∈ (B.livein \ B.in_regs) with minimum v.spill_profitability(B.entry)
 6     add v to B.in_regs

Putting All Together
The overall algorithm for spilling comprises several phases: First, we pre-compute
both liveness and profitability metrics. Then we traverse the CFG in topological
order, and each basic block is scanned using the initial value of B.in_regs as
explained above. During this phase, we maintain the sets of live variables available
in register and in memory at basic block boundaries. The last phase of the algorithms
handles the insertion of shuffle code (loads and stores) where needed.

22.3 Colouring and Coalescing

We advocate here a decoupled register allocation: First, lower the register pressure
so that Maxlive ≤ R; second, assign variable to registers. Live range splitting
ensures that, after the first phase is done, no more spilling will be required as R
will be sufficient, possibly at the cost of inserting register-to-register copies.
   We already mentioned in Sect. 22.1.3 that the well-known “Iterated Register
Coalescing” (IRC) allocation scheme, which uses a simplification scheme, can take
advantage of the SSA-form property. We will show here that, indeed, the underlying
structural property makes a graph colouring simplification scheme (recalled below)
an “optimal” scheme. This is especially important because, besides minimizing the
amount of spill code, the second objective of register allocation is to perform a
“good coalescing,” that is, try to minimize the amount of register-to-register copies:
a decoupled approach is practically viable if the coalescing phase is effective in
merging most of the live ranges, introduced by the splitting from SSA, by assigning
live ranges linked by copies to the same register.
   In this section, we will first present the traditional graph colouring heuristic,
based on a simplification scheme, and show how it successfully colours programs
under SSA form. We will then explain in greater detail the purpose of coalescing
and how it translates when performed on SSA-form program. Finally, we will show
how to extend the graph-based (from IRC) and the scan-based (of Algorithm 22.1)
greedy colouring schemes to perform efficient coalescing.

22.3.1 Greedy Colouring Scheme

In traditional graph colouring register allocation algorithms, the assignment of reg-
isters to variables is done by colouring the interference graph using a simplification
scheme. This result in what is called a greedy colouring scheme: this scheme is
based on the observation that, given R colours—representing the registers, if a
node in the graph has at most R − 1 neighbours, there will always be one colour
available for this node whatever colours the remaining nodes have. Such a node
can be simplified, that is, removed from the graph and placed on a stack. This
process can be iterated with the remaining nodes, whose degree may have decreased.
If the graph becomes empty, we know it is possible to colour the graph with R
colours, by assigning colours to nodes in the reverse order of their simplification,
that is, popping nodes from the stack and assigning them one available colour.
This is always possible since they have at most R − 1 coloured neighbours.
We call the whole process the greedy colouring scheme: Its first phase, whose
goal is to eliminate nodes from the graph to create the stack, is presented in
Algorithm 22.5, while the second phase, which assigns variables to registers, is
presented in Algorithm 22.6.
    The greedy colouring scheme is a colouring heuristic for general graphs, and as
such, it can fail. The simplification can get stuck whenever all remaining nodes have

 Algorithm 22.5: Greedy simplification scheme used by the greedy colouring
 scheme to create the stack. If this stage succeeds, the graph is said to be greedy-
 R-colourable
   Input: G = (V , E) an undirected graph
   Input: R: number of colors (registers)
   Input: For each vertex v, degree[v], the number of neighbours in G
 1 Function Simplify(G)
 2     stack ← ∅
 3     worklist ← {v ∈ V | degree[v] < R}
 4     while worklist ?= ∅ do
 5          let v ∈ worklist
 6          foreach w neighbour of v do
 7               degree[w] ← degree[w]−1
 8               if degree[w] = R − 1 then
 9                    add w to worklist
10              push v on stack
11              remove v from worklist
12              remove v from V                                  ? Remove v from the graph

13     if V ?= ∅ then
14          Failure ‘‘The graph is not simplifiable’’
15     return stack

 Algorithm 22.6: Greedy colouring assignment used in the greedy colouring
 scheme. The stack is the output of the Simplify function described in Algo-
 rithm 22.5
 1 Function Assign_colors(G)
 2    available ← new array of size R, with initialized values to True
 3    while stack ?= ∅ do
 4         v ← pop stack
 5         foreach neighbour w in G do
 6             available[color(w)] ← False                 ? color already used by neighbour
 7          foreach color c do
 8              if available[c] then
 9                   col ← c
10              available[c] = True                                 ? prepare for next round
11          color(v) ← col
12          add v to G

degree at least R. In that case, we do not know whether the graph is R-colourable or
not. In traditional register allocation, this is the trigger for spilling some variables so
as to unstuck the simplification process. However, under the SSA form, if spilling
has already been done so that the maximum register pressure is at most R, the greedy
colouring scheme can never get stuck! We will not formally prove this fact here but
will nevertheless try to give insight as to why this is true.

   The key to understanding that property is to picture the dominance tree, with live
ranges are sub-trees of this tree, such as the one in Fig. 22.2b. At the end of each
dangling branch, there is a “leaf” variable: the one that is defined last in this branch.
These are the variables y1 , y2 , y3 , and x3 in Fig. 22.2b. We can visually see that this
variable will not have many intersecting variables: those are the variables alive at its
definition point, i.e., no more than Maxlive − 1, hence less than R − 1. In Fig. 22.2b,
with Maxlive = 3, we see that each of them has no more than two neighbours.
   Considering again the greedy scheme, this means each of them is a candidate
for simplification. Once removed, another variable will become the new leaf of that
particular branch (e.g., x1 if y1 is simplified). This means simplification can always
happens at the end of the branches of the dominance tree, and the simplification
process can progress upward until the whole tree is simplified.
   In terms of graph theory, the general problem is knowing whether a graph is k-
colourable or not. Here, we can define a new class of graphs that contains the graphs
that can be coloured with this simplification scheme.
Definition 22.2 A graph is greedy-k-colourable if it can be simplified using the
Simplify function of Algorithm 22.5.
We could prove the following theorem:
Theorem 1 Setting k = Maxlive, the interference graph of a code under SSA form
is always greedy-k-colourable.
   This tells us that, if we are under SSA form and the spilling has already been
done so that Maxlive ≤ R, the classical greedy colouring scheme is guaranteed to
perform register allocation with R colours without any additional spilling, as the
graph is greedy-R-colourable.5

22.3.2 Coalescing Under SSA Form

The goal of coalescing is to minimize the number of register-to-register copies
instructions in the final code. In a graph-based allocation approach where the colour-
everywhere strategy is applied, each node of the interference graph corresponds
to a unique variable that will be allocated to a register along its entire live range.
Coalescing two nodes, or by extension coalescing the two corresponding variables,
means merging the nodes in the graph, thus imposing allocating the same register to
those variables. Any copy instruction between those two variables becomes useless
and can be safely removed.

5 Observe that, with a program originally under SSA form, practical implementation may still

choose to interleave the process of spilling and coalescing/colouring. Result will be unchanged,
but speed might be impacted.

   This way, coalescing, when done during the register allocation phase, is used
to minimize the amount of register-to-register copies in the final code. While there
may not be so many such copies at the high level (e.g., instructions “a ← b”)—
especially after a phase of copy propagation under SSA (see Chap. 8), many such
instructions are added in different compiler phases by the time compilation reaches
the register allocation phase. For instance, adding copies is a common way to deal
with register constraints (see the practical discussion in Sect. 22.4).
   An even more obvious and unavoidable reason in our case is the presence of φ-
functions due to the SSA form: The semantic of a φ-function corresponds to parallel
copies on incoming edges of basic blocks, and destructing SSA, that is, getting rid
of φ-functions that are not machine instructions, is done through the insertion of
copy instructions. It is thus better to assign variables linked by a φ-function to the
same register, so as to “remove” the associated copies between subscripts of the
same variable. As already formalized (see Sect. 21.2 of Chap. 21) for the aggressive
coalescing scheme, we define a notion of affinity, acting as the converse of the
relation of interference and expressing how much two variables “want” to share the
same register. By adding a metric to this notion, it measures the benefit one could
get if the two variables were assigned to the same register: the weight represents
how many instructions coalescing would save at execution.

22.3.3 Graph-Based Approach

Coalescing comes with several flavours, which can be either aggressive or con-
servative. Aggressively coalescing an interference graph means coalescing non-
interfering nodes (that is, constraining the colouring) regardless of the chromatic
number of the resulting graph. An aggressive coalescing scheme is presented in
Chap. 21. Conservatively coalescing an interference graph means coalescing non-
interfering nodes without increasing the chromatic number of the graph. In both
cases, the objective function is the maximization of satisfied affinities, that is, the
maximization of the number of (weighted) affinities between nodes that have been
coalesced together. In the current context, we will focus on the conservative scheme,
as we do not want more spilling.
    Obviously, because of the reducibility to graph-k-colouring, both coalescing
problems are NP-complete. However, graph colouring heuristics such as the Iter-
ated Register Coalescing use incremental coalescing schemes where affinities are
considered one after another. Incrementally, for two nodes linked by an affinity, the
heuristic will try to determine whether coalescing those two nodes will, with regard
to the colouring heuristic, increase the chromatic number of the graph or not. If not,
then the two corresponding nodes are (conservatively) coalesced. The IRC considers
two conservative coalescing rules that we recall here. Nodes with degree strictly less
than R are called low-degree nodes (those are simplifiable), while others are called
high-degree nodes.

Briggs rule merges u and v if the resulting node has less than R neighbours of
  high degree. This node can always be simplified after its neighbours, low-degree
  neighbours, are simplified; thus the graph remains greedy-R-colourable.
George rule merges u and v if all neighbours of u with high degree are also
  neighbours of v. After coalescing and once all low-degree neighbours are
  simplified, one gets a sub-graph of the original graph, thus greedy-R-colourable
  too.

   The Iterated Register Coalescing algorithm normally also performs spilling and
includes many phases that are interleaved with colouring and coalescing, called in
the literature “freezing,” “potential spills,” “select,” and “actual spill” phases.
   A pruned version of the coalescing algorithm used in the IRC can be obtained
by removing the freezing mechanism (explained below) and the spilling part. It is
presented in Algorithm 22.7. In this code, both the processes of coalescing and
simplification are combined. It works as follows:
1. Low-degree nodes that are not copy-related (no affinities) are simplified as much
   as possible.
2. When no more nodes can be simplified this way, an affinity is chosen. If one of
   the two rules (Briggs or George) succeeds, the corresponding nodes are merged.
   If not, the affinity is erased.
3. The process iterates (from stage 1) until the graph is empty.
    Originally, those rules were used for any graph, not necessarily greedy-R-
colourable, and with an additional clique of pre-coloured nodes—the physical
machine registers. With such general graphs, some restrictions on the applicability
of those two rules had to be applied when one of the two nodes was a pre-
coloured one. But in the context of greedy-R-colourable graphs, we do not need
such restrictions.
    However, in practice, those two rules give insufficient results to coalesce the
many copies introduced, for example, by a basic SSA destruction conversion. The
main reason is because the decision is too local: it depends on the degree of
neighbours only. But these neighbours may have a high degree just because their
neighbours are not simplified yet, that is, the coalescing test may be applied too
early in the simplify phase.
    This is the reason why the IRC actually iterates: instead of giving up coalescing
when the test fails, the affinity is “frozen,” that is, placed in a sleeping list and
“awakened” when the degree of one of the nodes implied in the rule changes. Thus,
affinities are in general tested several times, and copy-related nodes—nodes linked
by affinities with other nodes—should not be simplified too early to ensure the
affinities get tested.
    The advocated scheme corresponds to the pseudo-code of Algorithm 22.7 and
is depicted in Fig. 22.5. It tries the coalescing of a given affinity only once and
thus does not require any complex freezing mechanism as done in the original IRC.
This is made possible thanks to the following enhancement of the conservative
coalescing rule: Recall that the objective of Briggs and George rules is to test

 Algorithm 22.7: Pruned version of the Iterated Register Coalescing.
 Does not handle spilling but only colouring plus coalescing. It can be used
 instead of the Simplify function described in Algorithm 22.5, as it also produces
 a stack useable by the Assign_colour function of Algorithm 22.6
   Input: Undirected greedy-R-colorable graph G = (V , I )
   Data: R: number of colors
   Data: A: the affinity edges of G
   Data: For all v, degree[v] denotes the number of interfering neighbours of v in G
   Data: For all v, affinities[v] denotes {(v, w) ∈ A}
 1 Function Simplify_and_Coalesce(G)
 2     stack ← ∅
 3     simplifiable ← {v ∈ V | degree[v] < R and affinities[v] = ∅}
 4     while V ?= ∅ do
 5          while simplifiable ?= ∅ do
 6               let v ∈ simplifiable
 7               push v on stack
 8               remove v from G: update V , I , and simplifiable sets accordingly
 9            let a = (v, u) ∈ A of highest weight
                verify there is no interference (can happen after other merges)
10            if a exists and a ∈/ I and can_be_coalesced(a) then
11                 merge u and v into uv
12                 update V , I , and simplifiable sets accordingly
13            remove a from A
14     return stack

                                        coalesce                Brute

                  simplify           Briggs    George          simplify
      build                                                                            select

Fig. 22.5 Combined coalescing and colouring simplification scheme including Brute rule

whether the coalescing v and u breaks the greedy-R-colourable property of G
or not. If the Briggs and George tests fail, testing this property can be done
by running function Simplify(G) itself! Theoretically, this greatly increases the
complexity, as for each affinity, a full simplification process could be potentially
performed. However, experience shows that the overhead is somewhat balanced
by the magnitude lowering of calls to “can_be_coalesced.” This approach still
looks quite rough; hence, we named it the Brute coalescing heuristic. While this
is more costly than only using Briggs and George rules, adding this “brute”
rule improves substantially the quality of the result, in terms of suppressed copy
instructions.

22.3.4 Scan-Based Approach

The most natural way to perform coalescing using a scan-based (linear scan or tree
scan) approach would be to simply do biased colouring. Consider again the “tree
scan” depicted in Algorithm 22.1. Let us suppose the current program point p is a
copy instruction from variable v to v . The colour of v that is freed at line 3 can be
reused for v at line 5. In practice, this extremely local strategy does not work that
well for φ-functions. Consider as an example variables x1 , x2 , and x3 in the program
Fig. 22.2b. As there is no specific reason for the greedy allocation to assign the same
register to both x1 and x2 , when it comes to assigning one to x3 , the allocator will
often be able to only satisfy one of its affinities.
    To overcome this limitation, the idea is to use an aggressive pre-coalescing as
a pre-pass of our colouring phase. We can use one of the algorithms presented
in Chap. 21, but the results of aggressive coalescing should only be kept in a
separate structure and not applied to the program. The goal of this pre-pass is to
put copy-related variables into equivalence classes. In a classical graph colouring
allocator, the live ranges of the variables in a class are fused. We do not do so but
use the classes to bias the colouring. Each equivalence class has a colour, which is
initially unset, and is set as soon as one variable of the class is assigned to register.
When assigning a colour to a variable, tree scan checks if the colour of the class is
available, and picks it if it is. If not, it chooses a different colour (based on the other
heuristics presented here) and updates the colour of the class.

22.4 Practical Discussions and Further Reading

The amount of papers on register allocation is humongous. The most popular
approach is based on graph colouring, including many extensions [71, 190, 219]
of the seminal paper of Chaitin et al. [61]. The Iterated Register Coalescing,
mentioned several times in this chapter, is from George et al. [124]. The linear
scan approach is also extremely popular in particular in the context of just-in-
time compilation. This elegant idea goes back to Traub et al. [287] and Poletto and
Sarkar [230]. If this original version of linear scan contains a lot of hidden subtleties
(such as the computation of live ranges, handling of shuffle code in the presence
of critical edges, etc.), its memory footprint is smaller than a graph colouring
approach, and its practical complexity is smaller than the IRC. However, mostly
due to the highly over-approximated live ranges, its apparent simplicity comes
with a poor-quality resulting code. This leads to the development of interesting but
more complex extensions such as the works of Wimmer and Sarkar [252, 305].
All those approaches are clearly subsumed by the tree scan approach [80], both in
terms of simplicity, complexity, and quality of result. On the other hand, the linear
scan extension proposed by Barik in his thesis [17] is an interesting competitor, its
footprint being, possibly, more compact than the one used by a tree scan.

   There exists an elegant relationship between tree scan colouring and graph
colouring: Back in 1974, Gavril [122] showed that the intersection graphs of sub-
trees are the chordal graphs. By providing an elimination scheme that exposes the
underlying tree structure, this relationship allowed to prove that chordal graphs
can be optimally coloured in linear time with respect to the number of edges
in the graph. This is the rediscovering of this relationship in the context of
live ranges of variables for SSA-form programs that motivated different research
groups [39, 51, 136, 221] to revisit register allocation in the light of this interesting
property. Indeed, at that time, most register allocation schemes were incomplete
assuming that the assignment part was hard by referring to the NP-completeness
reduction of Chaitin et al. to graph colouring. However, the observation that SSA-
based live range splitting allows to decouple the allocation and assignment phases
was not new [87, 111]. Back in the nineties, the LaTTe [314] just-in-time compiler
already implemented the ancestor of our tree scan allocator. The most aggressive
live range splitting that was proposed by Appel and George [10] allowed to stress the
actual challenge that past approaches were facing when splitting live range to help
colouring, which is coalescing [40]. The PhD theses of Hack [135], Bouchez [38],
and Colombet [79] address the difficult challenge of making a neat idea applicable
to real life but without trading the elegant simplicity of the original approach. For
some more exhaustive related work references, we refer to the bibliography of those
documents.
Looking Under the Carpet
As done in (too) many register allocation papers, the heuristics described in this
chapter assume a simple non-realistic architecture where all variables or registers are
equivalent and where the instruction set architecture does not impose any specific
constraint on register usage. Reality is different, including: 1. register constraints
such as 2-address mode instructions that impose two of the three operands to
use the same register, or instructions that impose the use of specific registers;
2. registers of various sizes (vector registers usually leading to register aliasing),
historically known as register pairing problem; 3. instruction operands that cannot
reside in memory. Finally, SSA-based—but also any scheme that relies on live
range splitting—must deal with critical edges possibly considered abnormal (i.e.,
that cannot be split) by the compiler.
    In the context of graph colouring, register constraints are usually handled by
adding an artificial clique of pre-coloured node in the graph and splitting live
ranges around instructions with pre-coloured operands. This approach has several
disadvantages. First, it substantially increases the number of variables. Second, it
makes coalescing much harder. This motivated Colombet et al. [80] to introduce
the notion of antipathies (affinities with negative weight) and extend the coalescing
rules accordingly. The general idea is, instead of enforcing architectural constraints,
to simply express the cost (through affinities and antipathies) of shuffle code inserted
by a post-pass repairing. In a scan-based context, handling of register constraints is
usually done locally [203, 252]. The biased colouring strategy used in this chapter
is proposed by Braun et al. and Colombet et al. [46, 80] and allows to reduce need
for shuffle code.

   In the context of graph-based heuristics, vector registers are usually handled
through a generalized graph colouring approach [262, 281]. In the context of scan-
based heuristics, the puzzle solver [222] is an elegant formulation that allows to
express the local constraints as a puzzle.
   One of the main problems of the graph-based approach is its underlying
assumption that the live range of a variable is atomic. But when spilled, not all
instructions can access it through a memory operand. In other words, spilling has
the effect of removing the majority of the live ranges, but leaving “chads” that
correspond to shuffle code around instructions that use the spilled variable. These
replace the removed node in the interference graph, which is usually re-built at some
point. Those subtleties and associated complexity issues are exhaustively studied by
Bouchez et al. [41].
   As already mentioned, the semantics of φ-functions correspond to parallel copies
on the incoming edges of the basic block where they textually appear. When
lowering φ-functions, the register for the def operand may not match the register
of the use operand. If done naively, this imposes the following:
1. Splitting of the corresponding control-flow edge
2. Inserting of copies on this freshly created basic block
3. Using of spill code in case parallel copy requires a temporary register but none
   is available
This issue shares similarities with the SSA destruction that was described in
Chap. 21. The advocated approach is, just as for the register constraints, to express
the cost of an afterward repairing in the objective function of the register allocation
scheme. Then, locality, the repairing can be expressed as a standard graph colouring
problem on a very small graph containing the variables created by φ-nodes isolation
(see Fig. 21.1). However, it turns out that most of the associated shuffle codes can
usually be moved (and even annihilated) to and within the surrounding basic blocks.
Such post-pass optimizations correspond to the optimistic copy insertion of Braun
et al. [46] or the parallel copy motion of Bouchez et al. [43].
Decoupled Load/Store and Coalescing Optimization Problems
The scan-based spilling heuristic described in this chapter is inspired from the
heuristic developed by Braun and Hack [45]. It is an extension of Belady’s
algorithm [22], which was originally designed for page eviction, but can easily be
shown to be optimal for interval graphs (straight-line code and single use variables).
For straight-line code but multiple uses per variable, Farrach and Liberatore [114]
showed that if this further-first strategy works reasonably well, it can also be
formalized as a flow problem. For a deeper discussion about the complexity of the
spilling problem under different configurations, we refer to the work of Bouchez
et al. [41]. To conclude on the spilling part of the register allocation problem,
we need to mention the important problem of load/store placement. As implicitly
done by our heuristic given in Algorithm 22.4, one should, whenever possible,
hoist shuffle code outside of loops. This problem corresponds to the global code
motion addressed in Chap. 11 that should idealistically be coupled to the register

allocation problem. Another related problem, not mentioned in this chapter, is
rematerialization [48]. Experience shows that: 1. Rematerialization is one of the
main sources of performance improvement for register allocation. 2. In the vast
majority of cases, rematerialization simply amounts to rescheduling some of the
instructions. This remark allows to highlight one of the major limitations of the
presented approach common to almost all papers in the area of register allocation:
while scheduling and register allocation are clearly highly coupled problems, all
those approaches only consider a fixed schedule and only few papers try to address
the coupled problem [27, 78, 204, 209, 226, 242, 286, 301].
   Static Single Assignment has not been adopted by compiler designers for a long
time. One of the reasons is related to the numerous copy instructions inserted by
SSA destruction that the compiler could not get rid of afterwards. The coalescing
heuristics were not effective enough in removing all such copies, so even if it
was clear that live range splitting was useful for improving colourability, that is,
avoiding spill code, people were reluctant to split live ranges, preferring to do it on
demand [82]. The notion of value-based interference described in Paragraph 21.2
of Chap. 21 is an important step for improving the quality of existing schemes.
Details on the brute-force approach that extends the conservative coalescing scheme
depicted in this chapter can be found in Bouchez et al. [42]. However, there exist
several other schemes whose complexities are studied by Bouchez et al. [40].
Among others, the optimistic approach of Park and Moon [219] has been shown
to be extremely competitive [42, 132] in the context of the, somehow restricted,
“Optimal Coalescing Challenge” initiated by Appel and George, designers of the
Iterated Register Coalescing [124].
