Chapter 23
Hardware Compilation Using SSA

Pedro C. Diniz and Philip Brisk

This chapter describes the use of SSA-based high-level program representations for
the realization of the corresponding computations using hardware digital circuits.
We begin by highlighting the benefits of using a compiler SSA-based intermediate
representation in this hardware mapping process, using an illustrative example. The
subsequent sections describe hardware translation schemes for discrete hardware
logic structures or datapaths of hardware circuits and outline several compiler
transformations that benefit from SSA. We conclude with a brief survey of various
hardware compilation efforts from both academia and industry that have adopted
SSA-based internal representations.

23.1 Brief History and Overview

Hardware compilation is the process by which a high-level behavioural description
of a computation is translated into a hardware-based implementation, that is, a
circuit expressed in a hardware design language such as VHDL, or Verilog which
can be directly realized as an electrical (often digital) circuit.
   Hardware-oriented languages such as VHDL or Verilog allow programmers
to develop such digital circuits either by structural composition of blocks using
abstractions such as wires and ports or behaviourally by definition of the input-
output relations of signals in these blocks. A mix of both design approaches is
often found in medium to large designs. Using a structural approach, a circuit

P. C. Diniz (?)
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
e-mail: peddiniz@gmail.com
P. Brisk
UC Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA
e-mail: philip@cs.ucr.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   329
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_23

description will typically include discrete elements such as registers (flip-flops) that
capture the state of the computation at specific events, such as clock edges, and
combinatorial elements that transform the values carried by wires. The composition
of these elements allows programmers to build finite-state machines (FSMs) that
orchestrate the flow and the processing of data stored in internal registers or RAM
structures. These architectures support an execution model with operations akin to
assembly instructions found in common processors that support the execution of
high-level programs.
    A common vehicle for the realization of hardware designs is an FPGA or field-
programmable gate array. These devices include a large number of configurable
logic blocks (or CLBs), each of which can be individually programmed to realize
an arbitrary combinatorial function of k inputs whose outputs can be latched in
flip-flops and connected via an internal interconnection network to any subset of
the CLBs in the device. Given their design regularity and simple structure, these
devices, popularized in the 1980s as fast hardware prototyping vehicles, have taken
advantage of Moore’s law to grow to large sizes with which programmers can define
custom architectures capable of TFlops/Watt performance, thus making them the
vehicle of choice for very power-efficient custom computing machines.
    While developers were initially forced to design hardware circuits exclusively
using schematic capture tools, over the years, high-level behavioural synthesis
allowed them to leverage a wealth of hardware mapping and design exploration
techniques to realize substantial productivity gains.
    As an example, Fig. 23.1 illustrates these concepts of hardware mapping for the
computation expressed as x ← (a×b)−(c×d)+f . Figure 23.1b depicts a graphical
representation of a circuit that directly implements this computation. Here, there is
a direct mapping between hardware operators such as adders and multipliers and the
operations in the computation. Input values are stored in the registers at the top of
the diagram, and the entire computation is carried out during a single (albeit long)
clock cycle, at the end of which the results propagated through the various hardware
operators are captured (or latched) in the registers at the bottom of the diagram. In
all, this direct implementation uses two multipliers, two adders/subtractors, and six
registers, five registers to hold the computation’s input values and one to capture
the computation’s output result. This hardware implementation requires a simple
control scheme, as it just needs to record the input values, and wait for a single
clock cycle at the end of which it stores the outputs of the operations in the
output register. Figure 23.1c depicts a different implementation variant of the same
computation, this time using nine registers and the same number of adders and
subtractors.1 The increased number of registers allows the circuit to be clocked
at a higher frequency as well as to be executed in a pipelined fashion. Lastly,
Fig. 23.1d depicts yet another possible implementation of the same computation,

1 It may be apparent that the original computation lacks any temporal specification in terms of the

relative order in which data-independent operations can be carried out. Implementation variants
exploit this property.

       VHDL source code                                  Simple hardware design

                                 Pipelined hardware design

                    Pipelined hardware design with resources sharing

Fig. 23.1 Different variants of mapping a computation to hardware

but using a single multiplier operator. This last version allows for the reuse in time
of the multiplier operator and the required thirteen registers as well as multiplexers
to route the inputs to the multiplier in two distinct control steps. As is apparent,
the reduction in the number of operators, in this particular case the multipliers,
carries a penalty in the form of an increased number of registers and multiplexers.2
It can be viewed as a hardware implementation of the C programming language
selection operator: out = q ? in1 : in2 and increased complexity of the control
scheme.
   This example illustrates the many degrees of freedom in high-level behavioural
hardware synthesis. Synthesis techniques perform the classical tasks of allocation,
binding, and scheduling of the various operations in a computation given specific
target hardware resources. For instance, a designer can use a behavioural synthesis
tool (e.g., Xilinx’s Vivado) to automatically derive a hardware implementation for a
computation, as expressed in the example in Fig. 23.1a. This high-level description
suggests a simple, direct hardware implementation using a single adder and two
multipliers, as depicted in Fig. 23.1b. Alternative hardware implementations taking
advantage of pipelined execution and the sharing of a multiplier to reduce hardware
resources are respectively illustrated in Fig. 23.1c and Fig. 23.1d. The tool then
derives the control scheme required to route the data from registers to the selected
units so as to meet the designers’ goals.
   Despite the introduction of high-level behavioural synthesis techniques into
commercially available tools, hardware synthesis, and thus hardware compilation,
has never enjoyed the same level of success as traditional software compilation.
Sequential programming paradigms popularized by programming languages such
as C/C++ and, more recently, by Java, allow programmers to easily reason about
program behaviour as a sequence of program memory state transitions. The
underlying processors and the corresponding system-level implementations present
a number of simple unified abstractions—such as a unified memory model, a stack,
and a heap that do not exist (and often do not make sense) in customized hardware
designs.
   Hardware compilation, in contrast, has faced numerous obstacles that have
hampered its wide adoption. When developing hardware solutions, designers
must understand the concept of spatial concurrency that hardware circuits offer.
Precise timing and synchronization between distinct hardware components are key
abstractions in hardware. Solid and robust hardware design implies a detailed
understanding of the precise timing of specific operations, including I/O, that simply
cannot be expressed in languages such as C, C++, or Java. Alternatives such
as SystemC have emerged in recent years, giving the programmer considerably
more control over these issues. The inherent complexity of hardware designs
has hampered the development of robust synthesis tools that can offer high-level
programming abstractions enjoyed by tools that target traditional architecture and
software systems, thus substantially raising the barrier of entry for hardware design-

2 A 2 × 1 multiplexer is a combinatorial circuit with two data inputs, a single output and a control

input, where the control input selects which of the two data inputs is transmitted to the output.

ers in terms of productivity and robustness of the generated hardware solutions. At
best, hardware compilers today can only handle certain subsets of mainstream high-
level languages and at worst are limited to purely arithmetic sequences of operations
with strong restrictions on control flow.
   Nevertheless, the emergence of multi-core processing has led to the introduction
of new parallel programming languages and parallel programming constructs
that are more amenable to hardware compilation than traditional languages. For
example, MapReduce, originally introduced by Google to spread parallel jobs across
clusters of servers, has been an effective programming model for FPGAs as it
naturally exposes task-level concurrency with data independence. Similarly, high-
level languages based on parallel models of computation such as synchronous data
flow, or functional single-assignment languages, have also been shown to be good
choices for hardware compilation, as not only do they make data independence
obvious, but in many cases, the natural data partitioning they expose is a natural
match for the spatial concurrency of FPGAs.
   Although in the remainder of this chapter we will focus primarily on the
use of SSA representations for hardware compilation of imperative high-level
programming languages, many of the emerging parallel languages, while including
sequential constructs (such as control-flow graphs), also support true concurrent
constructs. These languages can be a natural fit to exploit the spatial and customiza-
tion opportunities of FPGA-based computing architectures. While the extension of
SSA form to these emerging languages is an open area of research, the fundamental
uses of SSA for hardware compilation, as discussed in this chapter, are likely to
remain a solid foundation for the mapping of these parallel constructs to hardware.

23.2 Why Use SSA for Hardware Compilation?

Hardware compilation, unlike its software counterpart, offers a spatially oriented
computational infrastructure that presents opportunities to leverage information
exposed by the SSA representation. We illustrate the direct connection between SSA
representation form and hardware compilation using the example of computation
mapping in Fig. 23.2a. Here the value of a variable v depends on the control flow
of the computation, as the temporary variable t can be assigned different values
depending on the value of the p predicate. The representation of this computation
is depicted in Fig. 23.2b, where a φ-function is introduced to capture the two
possible assignments to the temporary variable t in both control branches of the
if-then-else construct. Lastly, in Fig. 23.2c, we illustrate the corresponding
mapping to hardware.
    The basic observation is that the confluence of values for a given program vari-
able leads to the use of a φ-function. This φ-function abstraction thus corresponds
in terms of hardware implementation to the insertion of a multiplexer logic circuit.
This logic circuit uses the boolean value of a control input to select which of its
input’s values is to be propagated to its output. The selection or control input of

       Original code                SSA form                    Hardware mapping

Fig. 23.2 Basic hardware mapping using SSA representation

a multiplexer thus acts as a gated transfer of value that parallels the actions of an
if-then-else construct in software. Note also that in the case of a backward
control flow (e.g., associated with a back edge of a loop), the possible indefinition
of one of the φ-function’s inputs is transparently ignored by the fact that in a correct
execution the predicate associated with the true control-flow path will yield the value
associated with a defined input of the SSA representation.
    Equally important in this mapping is the notion that the computation in hardware
can now take a spatial dimension. In the hardware circuit in Fig. 23.2c, the computa-
tion derived from the statement in both branches of the if-then-else construct
can be evaluated concurrently by distinct logic circuits. After the evaluation of both
circuits, the multiplexer will define which set of values is used based on the value
of its control input, in this case of the value of the computation associated with p.
    In a sequential software execution environment, the predicate p would be
evaluated first, and then either branches of the if-then-else construct would
be evaluated, based on the value of p; as long as the register allocator is able to
assign t1 , t2 , and t3 to the same register, then the φ-function is executed implicitly;
if not, it is executed as a register-to-register copy.
    There have been some efforts to automatically convert the sequential program
above into a semi-spatial representation that could obtain some speedup if executed
on a VLIW (very long instruction word) type of processor. For example, if-
conversion (see Chap. 20) would convert the control dependency into a data
dependency: statements from the if and else blocks could be interleaved, as
long as they do not overwrite one another’s values, and the proper result (the φ-
function) could be selected using a conditional move instruction. In the worst case,
however, this approach would effectively require the computation of both branch
sides, rather than one, so it could increase the computation time. In contrast, in a
spatial representation, the correct result can be output as soon as two of the three

inputs to the multiplexer are known (p, and one of t1 or t2 , depending on the value
of p).
   While the Electronic Design Automation (EDA), community has for decades
now exploited similar information regarding data and control dependencies for the
generation of hardware circuits from increasingly higher-level representations (e.g.,
Behavioural HDL), SSA-based representations make these dependencies explicit
in the intermediate representation itself. Similarly, the more classical compiler
representation, using three-address instructions augmented with the def-use chains,
already exposes the data-flow information as for the SSA-based representation.
However, as we will explore in the next section, the latter facilitates the mapping
and selection of hardware resources.

23.3 Mapping a Control-Flow Graph to Hardware

In this section, we focus on hardware implementations of circuits that are spatial in
nature. We therefore do not address the mapping to architectures such as VLIW
or Systolic Arrays. While these architectures raise interesting and challenging
issues, namely scheduling and resource usage, we are more interested in exploring
and highlighting the benefits of SSA representation which, we believe, are more
naturally (although not exclusively) exposed in the context of spatial hardware
computations.

23.3.1 Basic Block Mapping

As a basic block is a straight-line sequence of three-address instructions, a simple
hardware mapping approach consists in composing or evaluating the operations in
each instruction as a data-flow graph. The inputs and outputs of the instructions
are transformed into registers3 connected by nodes in the graph that represent the
operators.
   As a result of the “evaluation” of the instructions in the basic block, this algorithm
constructs a hardware circuit that has as input registers that will hold the values of
the input variables to the various instructions and will have as outputs registers that
hold only variables that are live outside the basic block.

3 As a first approach, these registers are virtual, and then, after synthesis, some of them are

materialized to physical registers in a process similar to register allocation in software-oriented
compilation.

23.3.2 Basic Control-Flow Graph Mapping

One can combine the various hardware circuits corresponding to a control-flow
graph in two basic approaches, respectively, spatial and temporal. The spatial form
of combining hardware circuits consists in laying out the various circuits spatially
by connecting variables that are live at the output of a basic block, and therefore
the output registers of the corresponding hardware circuit, to the registers that will
hold the values of those same variables in subsequent hardware circuits of the basic
blocks that execute in sequence.
   In the temporal approach, the hardware circuits corresponding to the various CFG
basic blocks are not directly interconnected. Instead, their input and output registers
are connected via dedicated buses to a local storage module. An execution controller
“activates” a basic block or a set of basic blocks by transferring data between
the storage and the input registers of the hardware circuits to be activated. Upon
execution completion, the controller transfers the data from the output registers of
each hardware circuit to the storage module. These data transfers do not necessarily
need to be carried out sequentially, but instead can leverage the aggregation of the
outputs of each hardware circuit to reduce transfer time to and from the storage
module via dedicated wide buses.
   The temporal approach described above is well suited to the scenario where the
target hardware architecture does not have sufficient resources to simultaneously
implement the hardware circuits corresponding to all basic blocks of interest, as it
trades off execution time for hardware resources.
   In such a scenario, where hardware resources are very limited or the hardware
circuit corresponding to a set of basic blocks is exceedingly large, one could opt for
partitioning a basic block or a set of basic blocks into smaller blocks until the space
constraints for the realization of each hardware circuit are met. In reality, this is the
common approach in every processor today. It limits the hardware resources to those
required for each of the ISA instructions and schedules them in time at each step,
saving the states (registers) that were the output of the previous instruction. The
computation thus proceeds as described above by saving the values of the output
registers of the hardware circuit corresponding to each smaller block.
   These two approaches, illustrated in Fig. 23.3, can obviously be merged in a
hybrid implementation. As they lead to distinct control schemes for the orchestration
of the execution of computation in hardware, their choice depends heavily on the
nature and granularity of the target hardware architecture. For fine-grain hardware
architectures such as FPGAs, a spatial mapping can be favoured, while for coarse-
grain architectures a temporal mapping is common.
   While the overall execution control for the temporal mapping approach is
simpler, as the transfers to and from the storage module are done upon the transfer
of control between hardware circuits, a spatial mapping approach makes it easier to

                       CFG                                             Spatial mapping

                                       Temporal mapping

Fig. 23.3 Combination of hardware circuits for multiple basic blocks

take advantage of pipelining execution techniques and speculation.4 The temporal
mapping approach can, however, be area-inefficient, as often only one basic block
will execute at any point in time. This issue can nevertheless be mitigated by
exposing additional amounts of instruction-level parallelism by merging multiple
basic blocks into a single hyper-block and combining this aggregation with loop
unrolling. Still, as these transformations and their combination can lead to a
substantial increase in the required hardware resources, a compiler can exploit
resource sharing between the hardware units corresponding to distinct basic blocks

4 Speculation is also possible in the temporal mode by activating the inputs and execution of

multiple hardware blocks and is only limited by the available storage bandwidth to restore the
input context in each block, which, in the spatial approach, is trivial.

to reduce the pressure on resource requirements and thus lead to feasible hardware
implementation designs. As these optimizations are not specific to the SSA repre-
sentation, we will not discuss them further here.

23.3.3 Control-Flow Graph Mapping Using SSA

In the spatial mapping approach, the SSA form plays an important role in the
minimization of multiplexers and thus in the simplification of the corresponding
data-path logic and execution control.
   Consider the illustrative example in Fig. 23.4a. Here, basic block BB0 defines
a value for the variables x and y. One of the two subsequent basic blocks BB1
redefines the value of x, whereas the other basic block BB2 only reads x.
   A naive implementation based exclusively on liveness analysis (see Chap. 9)
would use multiplexers for both variables x and y to merge their values as inputs
to the hardware circuit implementing basic block BB3, as depicted in Fig. 23.4b.
As can be observed, however, the SSA form representation captures the fact that
such a multiplexer is only required for variable x. The value for variable y can be
propagated either from the output value in the hardware circuit for basic block BB0
(as shown in Fig. 23.4c) or from any other register that has a valid copy of the
y variable. The direct flow of the single definition point to all its uses, across the
hardware circuits corresponding to the various basic blocks in the SSA form, thus
allows a compiler to use the minimal number of multiplexers strictly required.5
   An important aspect of the implementation of a multiplexer associated with a
φ-function is the definition and evaluation of the predicate associated with each
multiplexer’s control (or selection) input signal. In the basic SSA representation, the
selection predicates are not explicitly defined, as the execution of each φ-function is
implicit when the control flow reaches it. When mapping a computation to hardware,
however, a φ-function clearly elicits the need to define a predicate to be included as
part of the hardware logic circuit that defines the value of the multiplexer circuit’s
selection input signal. To this effect, hardware mapping must rely on a variant of
SSA, named gated SSA (see Chap. 14), which explicitly captures the symbolic
predicate information in the representation.6 The generation of the hardware circuit
simply uses the register that holds the corresponding variable’s version value of the
predicate. Figure 23.5 illustrates an example of a mapping using the information
provided by the gated SSA form.
   When combining multiple predicates in the gated SSA form, it is often desirable
to leverage the control-flow representation in the form of the program dependence
graph (PDG) described in Chap. 14. In the PDG representation, basic blocks that

5 Under the scenarios of a spatial mapping and with the common disclaimers about static control-

flow analysis.
6 As with any SSA representation, variable names fulfil the referential transparency.

Fig. 23.4 Mapping of variable values across hardware circuit using spatial mapping

share common execution predicates (i.e., both execute under the same predicate
conditions) are linked to the same region nodes. Nested execution conditions are
easily recognized as the corresponding nodes are hierarchically organized in the
PDG representation. As such, when generating code for a given basic block, an
algorithm will examine the various region nodes associated with a given basic
block and compose (using AND operators) the outputs of the logic circuits that
implement the predicates associated with these nodes. If a hardware circuit already
exists that evaluates a given predicate that corresponds to a given region, the
implementation can simply reuse its output signal. This lazy code generation and
predicate composition achieves the goal of hardware circuit sharing, as illustrated
by the example in Fig. 23.6 where some of the details were omitted for simplicity.
When using the PDG representation, however, care must be taken regarding the

         Original code

        gated SSA form            Hardware circuit implementation using spatial mapping

Fig. 23.5 Hardware generation example using gated SSA form

potential lack of referential transparency. To this effect, it is often desirable to
combine the SSA information with the PDG’s regions to ensure correct reuse of
the hardware that evaluates the predicates associated with each control-dependence
region.

23.3.4 φ-Function and Multiplexer Optimizations

We now describe a set of hardware-oriented transformations that can be applied
to potentially reduce the amount of hardware resources devoted to multiplexer
implementation or to use multiplexers to change the temporal features of the
execution and thus enable other aspects of hardware execution to be more effective
(e.g., scheduling). Although these transformations are not specific to the mapping
of computations to hardware, the explicit representation of the selection constructs
in SSA makes it very natural to map and therefore manipulate/transform the
resulting hardware circuit using multiplexers. Other operations in the intermediate
representation (e.g., predicated instructions) can also yield multiplexers in hardware
without the explicit use of SSA form.
   A first transformation is motivated by a well-known result in computer arith-
metic: integer addition scales with the number of operands. Building a large, unified

                                               Source code

            PDG skeleton.                       Hardware design implementation
         Region nodes omitted

Fig. 23.6 Use of the predicates in region nodes of the PDG for mapping into the multiplexers
associated with each φ-function

k-input integer addition circuit is more efficient than adding k integers two at a time.
Moreover, hardware multipliers naturally contain multi-operand adders as building
blocks: a partial product generator (a layer of AND gates) is followed by a multi-
operand adder called a partial product reduction tree. For these reasons, there have
been several efforts in recent years to apply high-level algebraic transformations
to source code with the goal of merging multiple addition operations with partial
product reduction trees of multiplication operations. The basic flavour of these
transformations is to push the addition operators towards the outputs of a data-flow
graph, so that they can be merged at the bottom. Examples of these transformations
that use multiplexers are depicted in Fig. 23.7a and b. In the case of Fig. 23.7a,
the transformation leads to the fact that an addition is always executed, unlike in
the original hardware design. This can lead to more predictable timing or more
uniform power draw signatures.7 Figure 23.7c depicts a similar transformation that

7 An important issue in security-related aspects of the execution.

          a         b        c         d         a         c         b     “0”      d

               +                                     MUX                 MUX

                   MUX                                         +

                    y                                           y

                                           (a)

                    a        b         c         a      “0”          b         c

                         +                                     MUX

                   MUX                                     +

                    y                                      y

                                           (b)

          a         b        d         c         a         d         b         c

              MUX                MUX                           MUX

                         +                                 +

                         y                                 y

                                           (c)

Fig. 23.7 Multiplexer-operator transformations: juxtaposition of a multiplexer and an adder (a
and b); reducing the number of multiplexers placed on the input of an adder (c)

merges two multiplexers sharing a common input, while exploiting the commutative
property of the addition operator. The SSA-based representation facilitates these
transformations as it explicitly indicates which values (by tracing backward in the
representation) are involved in the computation of the corresponding values. For the
example in Fig. 23.7b, a compiler could quickly detect the variable a to be common
to the two expressions associated with the φ-function.

   A second transformation that can be applied to multiplexers is specific to FPGA,
whose basic building block consists of a k-input lookup table (LUT) logic element
which can be programmed to implement any k-input logic function.8 For example,
a 3-input LUT (3-LUT) can be programmed to implement a multiplexer with
two data inputs and one selection bit. Similarly, a 6-LUT can be programmed to
implement a multiplexer with four data inputs and two selection bits, thus enabling
the implementation of a tree of 2-input multiplexers.

23.3.5 Implications of Using SSA Form in Floor Planning

For spatial oriented hardware circuits, moving a φ-function from one basic block
to another can alter the length of the wires that are required to transmit data from
the hardware circuits corresponding to the various basic blocks. As the boundaries
of basic blocks are natural synchronization points, where values are captured in
hardware registers, the length of wires dictates the maximum allowed hardware
clock rate for synchronous designs. We illustrate this effect via an example as
depicted in Fig. 23.8. In this figure, each basic block is mapped to a distinct hardware
unit, whose spatial implementation is approximated by a rectangle. A floor planning
algorithm must place each of the units in a two-dimensional plane while ensuring
that no two units overlap. As can be seen in Fig. 23.8a, placing block 4 on the
right-hand side of the plane will result in several mid-range and one long-range
wire connections. However, placing block 4 at the centre of the design would
virtually eliminate all mid-range connections as all connections corresponding to the
transmission of the values for variable x are now next-neighbouring connections.
    The same result could be obtained by moving the φ-function to block 5, which
is illustrated in Fig. 23.8b. But moving a multiplexer from one hardware unit to
another can significantly change the dimensions of the resulting unit, which is not
under the control of the compiler. Changing the dimensions of the hardware units
fundamentally changes the placement of modules, so it is very difficult to predict
whether moving a φ-function will actually be beneficial. For this reason, compiler
optimizations that attempt to improve the physical layout must be performed using
a feedback loop so that the results of the lower-level CAD tools that produce the
layout can be reported back to the compiler.

8 A typical k-input LUT will include an arbitrary combinatorial functional block of those k inputs

followed by an optional register element (e.g., Flip-Flop).

Fig. 23.8 Example of the impact of φ-function movement in reducing hardware wire length

23.4 Existing SSA-Based Hardware Compilation Efforts

Several research projects have relied on SSA-based intermediate representations
that leverage control- and data-flow information to exploit fine-grain parallelism.
Often, but not always, these efforts have been geared towards mapping computations
to fine-grain hardware structure, such as the ones offered by FPGAs.
    The standard approach followed in these compilers has been to translate a high-
level programming language such as Java, in the case of the Sea Cucumber [288]
compiler, or C, in the case of the DEFACTO [105] and ROCCC [133] compilers
that translate C code to sequences of intermediate instructions. These sequences are
then organized in basic blocks that compose the control-flow graph (CFG). For each
basic block a data-flow graph (DFG) is typically extracted followed by a conversion
into SSA representation, possibly using predicates associated with the control flow
in the CFG, thus explicitly using Predicated SSA representation (see the gated SSA
representation [290] and the Predicate SSA [58, 104, 275]).
    As an approach to increase the potential amount of exploitable ILP at the
instruction level, many of these efforts (as well as others such as the earlier Garp
compiler [55]) restructure the CFG into hyper-blocks [191]. A hyper-block consists
in single-entry multi-exit regions derived from the aggregation of multiple basic
blocks, thus serializing longer sequences of instruction. As not all instructions
are executed in a hyper-block (due to early exit of a block), hardware circuit
implementation must rely on predication to exploit the potential for additional ILP.

   The CASH compiler [54] uses an augmented predicated SSA representation with
tokens to explicitly express synchronization and handle may-dependencies, thus
supporting speculative execution. This fine-grain synchronization mechanism is also
used to serialize the execution of consecutive hyper-blocks, thus greatly simplifying
the code generation. Other efforts also exploit instruction-level optimizations or
algebraic properties of the operators for minimization of expensive hardware
resources such as multipliers, adders, and in some cases even multiplexers [198,
298]. For a comprehensive description of a wide variety of hardware-oriented high-
level program transformations, the reader is referred to [57].
Further Reading
Despite their promise in terms of high performance and high computational
efficiency, hardware devices such as FPGAs have long been beyond the reach of
the “average” software programmer. To effectively program them using hardware-
oriented programming languages such as VHDL [12], Verilog [283], OpenCL [173],
or SystemC [218], the developers must assume the role of both software and
hardware designs.
    To address the semantic gap between a hardware-oriented programming model
and high-level software programming models, various research projects, first in
academia and later in industry, developed prototype tools that could bridge this gap
and make the promising technology of configurable logic approachable among a
wider audience of programmers. In these efforts, loosely labeled C-to-Gates, com-
pilers performed the traditional phases of program data- and control-dependence
analysis to uncover opportunities for concurrent and/or pipelined execution and
directly translated the underlying data flow to Verilog/VHDL description alongside
the corresponding control logic. In practice, these compilers, of which Vivado
HLS [310] and LegUp [56] are notable examples, focus on loop constructs
with significant execution time weights (the so-called hot-spots) for which they
automatically derive hardware pipelined implementations (often guided by user-
provided compilation directives) that efficiently executed them. When the target
architecture is a “raw” FPGA (rather than an overlay architecture), this approach
invariably leads to long compilation and synthesis times.
    The inherent difficulties and limitations in extracting enough instruction-level
Parallelism in these approaches, coupled with the increase in the devices’ capacities
(e.g. Intel’s Arria [147] and Xilinx’s Virtex UltraScale+ [311]), have prompted
a search for programming models with a more natural concurrency that would
facilitate the mapping of high-level computation to hardware. One such example is
MapReduce[95], originally introduced by Google to naturally distribute concurrent
jobs across clusters of servers [95], which has been an effective programming
model for FPGAs [315]. Similarly, high-level languages based on parallel models of
computation such as synchronous data flow [179] or functional single-assignment
languages have also been shown to be good choices for hardware compilation [33,
137, 145].
