Chapter 24
Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP

Paul Biggar and David Gregg

Dynamic scripting languages such as PHP, Python, and JavaScript are among the
most widely used programming languages.
   Dynamic scripting languages provide flexible high-level features, a fast modify-
compile-test environment for rapid prototyping, strong integration with popular
strongly typed programming languages, and an extensive standard library. Dynamic
scripting languages are widely used in the implementation of many of the best-
known web applications of the last decade such as Facebook, Wikipedia, and Gmail.
Most web browsers support scripting languages such as JavaScript for client-side
applications that run within the browser. Languages such as PHP and Ruby are
popular for server-side web pages that generate content dynamically and provide
close integration with back-end databases.
   One of the most widely used dynamic scripting languages is PHP, a general-
purpose language that was originally designed for creating dynamic web pages.
PHP has many of the features that are typical of dynamic scripting languages. These
include a simple syntax, dynamic typing and the ability to dynamically generate new
source code during runtime, and execute that code. These simple flexible features
facilitate rapid prototyping, exploratory programming, and in the case of many non-
professional websites, a copy-paste-and-modify approach to scripting by non-expert
programmers.
   Constructing SSA form for languages such as C/C++ and Java is a well-studied
problem. Techniques exist to handle the most common features of static languages,
and these solutions have been tried and tested in production-level compilers over
many years. In these static languages, it is not difficult to identify a set of scalar

P. Biggar ()
Darklang, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: paul.biggar@gmail.com
D. Gregg
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
e-mail: David.Gregg@tcd.ie

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   347
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_24
348                                                              P. Biggar and D. Gregg

variables that can be safely renamed. Better analysis may lead to more such variables
being identified, but significant numbers of such variables can be found with very
simple analysis.
   In our study of optimizing dynamic scripting languages, specifically PHP, we
find this is not the case. The information required to build SSA form—that is, a
conservatively complete set of unaliased scalars, and the locations of their uses and
definitions—is not available directly from the program source and cannot be derived
from a simple analysis. Instead, we find a litany of features whose presence must be
ruled out, or heavily analysed, in order to obtain a non-pessimistic estimate.
   Dynamic scripting languages commonly feature runtime generation of source
code, which is then executed, built-in functions, and variable-variables, all of which
may alter arbitrary unnamed variables. Less common—but still possible—features
include the existence of object handlers which have the ability to alter any part of
the program state, most dangerously a function’s local symbol table. The original
implementations of dynamic scripting languages were all interpreted, and in many
cases, this led to their creators including very dynamic language features that are
easy to implement in an interpreter but make program analysis and compilation
very difficult.
   Ruling out the presence of these features requires precise, inter-procedural,
whole-program analysis. We discuss the futility of the pessimistic solution, the
analyses required to provide a precise SSA form, and how the presence of variables
of unknown types affects the precision of SSA.
   Note that dynamic scripting languages share similar features of other kinds of
dynamic programming languages, such as Lisp and Smalltalk. The main distin-
guishing feature of dynamic languages is that they resolve at runtime behaviours
that many other languages perform at compile time. Thus, languages such as Lisp
support dynamic typing and runtime generation of source code which can then
be executed. The main difference between scripting languages and other dynamic
languages is their intended use, rather than the features of the language. Scripting
languages were originally designed for writing short scripts, often to invoke other
programs or services. It was only later that developers started to write large complex
programs using scripting languages.
   The rest of this chapter describes our experiences with building SSA in PHC, an
open source compiler for PHP. We identify the features of PHP that make building
SSA difficult, outline the solutions we found to these some of these challenges, and
draw some lessons about the use of SSA in analysis frameworks for PHP.

24.1 SSA Form in Statically Typed Languages

In statically typed, non-scripting languages, such as C, C++, and Java, it is
straightforward to identify which variables may be converted into SSA form. In
Java, all scalars may be renamed. In C and C++, any scalar variables that do not
have their address taken may be renamed. Figure 24.1 shows a simple C function,
24 Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP                                             349

Fig. 24.1 Simple C code                             1: int factorial(int num) {
                                                    2:   int result = 1, i;
                                                    3:
                                                    4:   while ( num > 1 ) {
                                                    5:     result = result * num;
                                                    6:     num --;
                                                    7:   }
                                                    8:   return result;
                                                    9: }

Fig. 24.2 C code with                                           1:   void func() {
pointers                                                        2:     int x=5, *y;
                                                                3:     y = &x;
                                                                4:     *y = 7;
                                                                5:     return x;
                                                                6:   }

whose local variables may all be converted into SSA form. In Fig. 24.1, it is trivial
to convert each variable into SSA form. For each statement, the list of variables that
are used and defined is immediately obvious from a simple syntactic check.
   By contrast, Fig. 24.2 contains variables that cannot be trivially converted into
SSA form. On Line 3, the variable x has its address taken. As a result, to convert x
into SSA form, we must know that Line 4 modifies x and introduce a new version
of x accordingly. Chapter 16 describes HSSA form, a powerful way to represent
indirect modifications to scalars in SSA form.
   To discover the modification of x on Line 4 requires an alias analysis. Alias
analyses detect when multiple program names (aliases) represent the same memory
location. In Fig. 24.2, x and ∗y alias each other.
   There are many variants of alias analysis, of varying complexity. The most
complex ones analyse the entire program text, taking into account the control flow,
the function calls, and multiple levels of pointers. However, it is not difficult to
perform a very simple alias analysis. Address-taken alias analysis identifies all
variables whose addresses are taken by a referencing assignment. All variables
whose address has been taken anywhere in the program are considered to alias each
other (that is, all address-taken variables are in the same alias set).
   When building SSA form with address-taken alias analysis, variables in the alias
set are not renamed into SSA form. All other variables are converted. Variables not
in SSA form do not possess any SSA properties, and pessimistic assumptions must
be made. As a result of address-taken alias analysis, it is straightforward to convert
any C program into SSA form, without sophisticated analysis. In fact, this allows
more complex alias analyses to be performed on the SSA form.
350                                                                P. Biggar and D. Gregg

24.2 PHP and Aliasing

In PHP, it is not possible to perform an address-taken alias analysis. The syntactic
clues that C provides—notably as a result of static typing—are not available in PHP.
Indeed, statements that may appear innocuous may perform complex operations
behind the scenes, affecting any variable in the function. Figure 24.3 shows a small
piece of PHP code. Note that in PHP, variable names start with the $ sign.
    The most common appearance of aliasing in PHP is due to variables that store
references. Creating references in PHP does not look so very different from C. In
Fig. 24.3, the variable y becomes a reference to the variable x. Once y has become
an alias for x, the assignment to y (in Line 3) also changes the value of x.
    On first glance, the PHP code in Fig. 24.3 is not very different from similar C
code in Fig. 24.2. From the syntax, it is easy to see that a reference to the variable x
is taken. Thus, it is clear that x cannot be easily renamed. However, the problem is
actually with the variable y which contains the reference to the variable x.
    There is no type declaration to say that y in Fig. 24.3 is a reference. In fact, due
to dynamic typing, PHP variables may be references at one point in the program
and stop being references a moment later. Or at a given point in a program, a given
variable may be a reference variable or a non-reference variable depending upon
the control flow that preceded that point. PHP’s dynamic typing makes it difficult to
simply identify when this occurs, and a sophisticated analysis over a larger region
of code is essential to building a more precise conservative SSA form.
    The size of this larger region of code is heavily influenced by the semantics of
function parameters in PHP. Consider the PHP function in Fig. 24.4a. Superficially,
it resembles the C function in Fig. 24.4b. In the C version, we know that x and y are
simple integer variables and that no pointer aliasing relationship between them is
possible. They are separate variables that can be safely renamed. In fact, a relatively
simple analysis can show that the assignment to x in Line 2 of the C code can be
optimized away because it is an assignment to a dead variable.
    In the PHP version in Fig. 24.4a, x may alias y upon function entry. This can
happen if x is a reference to y, or vice versa, or if both x and y are references to a

                                      1:   $x = 5;
                                      2:   $y =& $x;
                                      3:   $y = 7;

Fig. 24.3 Creating and using a reference in PHP

        1:   function foo($x, $y) {               1:   int foo(int x, int y) {
        2:     $x = $x + $y;                      2:     x = x + y;
        3:     return $y;                         3:     return y;
        4:   }                                    4:   }

Fig. 24.4 Similar (a) PHP and (b) C functions with parameters
24 Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP                                                 351

third variable. It is important to note, however, that the possibility of such aliasing is
not apparent from the function prototype or any type declarations. Instead, whether
the formal parameter x and/or y are references depends on the types of actual
parameters that are passed when the function is invoked. If a reference is passed as a
parameter to a function in PHP, the corresponding formal parameter in the function
also becomes a reference.
    The addition operation in Line 2 of Fig. 24.4a may therefore change the value of
y, if x is a reference to y or vice versa. In addition, recall that dynamic typing in PHP
means that whether or not a variable contains a reference can depend on control flow
leading to different assignments. Therefore, on some executions of a function, the
passed parameters may be references, whereas on other executions they may not.
    In the PHP version, there are no syntactic clues that variables may alias.
Furthermore, as we show in Sect. 24.4, there are additional features of PHP that
can cause the values of variables to be changed without simple syntactic clues. In
order to be sure that no such features can affect a given variable, an analysis is
needed to detect such features. As a result, a simple conservative aliasing estimate
that does not take account of PHP’s references and other difficult features—similar
to C’s address-taken alias analysis—would need to place all variables in the alias
set. This would leave no variables available for conversion to SSA form. Instead, an
inter-procedural analysis is needed to track references between functions.

24.3 Our Whole-Program Analysis

PHP’s dynamic typing means that program analysis cannot be performed a function
at a time. As function signatures do not indicate whether parameters are references,
this information must be determined by inter-procedural analysis. Furthermore, each
function must be analysed with full knowledge of its calling context. This requires
a whole-program analysis. We present an overview of the analysis below. A full
description is beyond the scope of this chapter.

24.3.1 The Analysis Algorithm

The analysis is structured as a symbolic execution. This means the program is
analysed by processing each statement in turn and modelling the effect of the
statement on the program state. This is similar in principle to the sparse conditional
constant propagation (SSA-CCP) algorithm described in Sect. 8.3.1
   The SCCP algorithm models a function at a time. Instead, our algorithm models
the entire program. The execution state of the program begins empty, and the

1 The analysis is actually based on a variation, conditional constant propagation.
352                                                                  P. Biggar and D. Gregg

analysis begins at the first statement in the program, which is placed in a worklist.
The worklist is then processed a statement at a time.
    For each analysed statement, the results of the analysis are stored. If the analysis
results change, the statement’s direct successors (in the control-flow graph) are
added to the worklist. This is similar to to the treatment of CFG edges (through
CFGWorkList) in the SCCP algorithm. There is no parallel to the treatment of SSA
edges (SSAWorkList), since the analysis is not performed on the SSA form. Instead,
loops must be fully analysed if their headers change.
    This analysis is therefore less efficient than the SCCP algorithm, in terms of time.
It is also less efficient in terms of space. SSA form allows results to be compactly
stored in a single array, using the SSA index as an array index. This is very space
efficient. In our analysis, we must instead store a table of variable results at all points
in the program.
    Upon reaching a function or method call, the analysis begins analysing the callee
function, pausing the caller’s analysis. A new worklist is created and initialized with
the first statement in the callee function. The worklist is then run until it is exhausted.
If another function call is analysed, the process recurses.
    Upon reaching a callee function, the analysis results are copied into the scope of
the callee. Once a worklist has ended, the analysis results for the exit node of the
function are copied back to the calling statement’s results.

24.3.2 Analysis Results

Our analysis computes and stores three different kinds of results. Each kind of result
is stored at each point in the program.
    The first models the alias relationships in the program in a points-to graph.
The graph contains variable names as nodes, and the edges between them indicate
aliasing relationships. An aliasing relationship indicates that two variables either
must-alias or may-alias. Two unconnected nodes cannot alias. A points-to graph is
stored for each point in the program. Graphs are merged at CFG join nodes.
    Secondly, our analysis also computes a conservative estimate of the types of
variables in the program. Since PHP is an object-oriented language, polymorphic
method calls are possible, and they must be analysed. As such, the set of possible
types of each variable is stored at each point in the program. This portion of the
analysis closely resembles using SCCP for type propagation.
    Finally, like the SCCP algorithm, constants are identified and propagated through
the analysis of the program. Where possible, the algorithm resolves branches
statically using propagated constant values. This is particularly valuable because
our PHC ahead-of-time compiler for PHP creates many branches in the interme-
diate representation during early stages of compilation. Resolving these branches
statically eliminates unreachable paths, leading to significantly more precise results
from the analysis algorithm.
24 Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP                                                       353

24.3.3 Building Def-Use Sets

To build SSA form, we need to be able to identify the set of points in a program
where a given variable is defined or used. Since we cannot easily identify these sets
due to potential aliasing, we build them as part of our program analysis. Using our
alias analysis, any variables that may be written to or read from during a statement’s
execution are added to a set of defs and uses for that statement. These are then used
during construction of the SSA form.
   For an assignment by copy, $x = $y:
1. $x’s value is defined.
2. $x’s reference is used (by the assignment to $x).
3. For each alias $x_alias of $x, $x_alias’s value is defined. If the alias is possible,
   $x_alias’s value is may-defined instead of defined. In addition, $x_alias’s
   reference is used.
4. $y’s value is used.
5. $y’s reference is used.
   For an assignment by reference, $x =& $y:
1. $x’s value is defined.
2. $x’s reference is defined (it is not used—$x does not maintain its previous
   reference relationships).
3. $y’s value is used.
4. $y’s reference is used.

24.3.4 HSSA

Once the set of locations where each variable is defined or used has been identified,
we have the information needed to construct SSA. However, it is important to
note that due to potential aliasing and potential side effects of some difficult-to-
analyse PHP features (see Sect. 24.4), many of the definitions we compute are
may-definitions. Whereas a normal definition of a variable means that the variable
will definitely be defined, a may-definition means that the variable may be defined
at that point.2
    In order to accommodate these may-definitions in our SSA form for PHP, we
adapt a number of features from Hashed SSA form.

2 Or more precisely, a may-definition means that there exists at least one possible execution of

the program where the variable is defined at that point. Our algorithm computes a conservative
approximation of may-definition information. Therefore, our algorithm reports a may-definition
in any case where the algorithm cannot prove that no such definition can exist on any possible
execution.
354                                                             P. Biggar and D. Gregg

   After performing our alias analysis, we convert our intermediate representation
into SSA form. As in HSSA form, we give names to all memory locations in
our program, including locations inside arrays and hash tables, if they are directly
referred to in source being analysed.
   We augment our SSA form with μ and χ functions, representing may-uses and
may-definitions, respectively.
   Principally, the difference between our SSA form and traditional SSA is that all
names in the program are included in the SSA representation. In addition, for each
statement in the program, we maintain a set of names which must be defined, which
might be defined, and which are used (either possibly or definitely). Names that may
be defined are the same concept as χ variables in HSSA, but there may also be more
than one name that must be defined.
   We also add φ-functions for names that are only used in χ operations or which
must be defined but are not syntactically present in the statement. As these φ-
functions are not for real variables, we cannot add copies to represent them when
destructing SSA form and must instead drop all SSA indices. While this is a valid
means of destructing SSA form, it slightly limits the optimizations that can be
performed. For example, copy-propagation cannot move copies past the boundary
of a variable’s live range.
   We do not use virtual variables, zero versioning, or global value numbering (the
hash in Hashed SSA). However, in order to scale our SSA form in the future, it
would be necessary to incorporate these features.
   The final distinction from traditional SSA form is that we do not only model
scalar variables. All names in the program, such as fields of objects or the contents
of arrays, can be represented in SSA form.

24.4 Other Challenging PHP Features

For simplicity, the description so far of our algorithm has only considered the
problems arising from aliasing due to PHP reference variables. However, in the
process of constructing SSA in our PHP compiler several other PHP language
features make it difficult to identify all the points in a program where a variable
may be defined. In this section, we briefly describe these language features and how
they may be dealt with in order to conservatively identify all may-definitions of all
variables in the program.

24.4.1     Runtime Symbol Tables

Figure 24.5 shows a program which accesses a variable indirectly. On line 2, a string
value is read from the user and stored in the variable var_name. On line 3, some
variable—whose name is the value in var_name—is set to 5. That is, any variable
24 Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP                                               355

Fig. 24.5 PHP code using a                            1:   $x = 5;
variable-variable                                     2:   $var_name = readline( );
                                                      3:   $$var_name = 6;
                                                      4:   print $x;

can be updated, and the updated variable is chosen by the user at runtime. It is not
possible to know whether the user has provided the value “x” and so know whether
x has the value 5 or 6.
    This feature is known as variable-variables. They are possible because a
function’s symbol table in PHP is available at runtime. Variables in PHP are not
the same as variables in C. A C local variable is a name which represents a memory
location on the stack. A PHP local variable is the domain of a map from strings
to values. The same runtime value may be the domain of multiple string keys
(references, discussed above). Similarly, variable-variables allow the symbol table
to be accessed dynamically at runtime, allowing arbitrary values to be read and
written.
    Upon seeing a variable-variable, all variables may be written to. In HSSA form,
this creates a χ -function for every variable in the program. In order to reduce the set
of variables that might be updated by assigning to a variable-variable, the contents of
the string stored in var_name may be modelled using a string analysis by Wasserman
and Su.
    String analysis is a static program analysis that models the structure of strings.
For example, string analysis may be able to tell us that the name stored in the
variable-variable (that is the name of the variable that will be written to) begins with
the letter “x.” In this case, all variables that do not begin with “x” do not require a
χ -function, leading to a more precise SSA form.

24.4.2 Execution of Arbitrary Code

PHP provides a feature that allows an arbitrary string to be executed as a code. This
eval statement simply executes the contents of any string as if the contents of the
string appeared inline in the location of the eval statement. The resulting code can
modify local or global variables in arbitrary ways. The string may be computed by
the program or read in from the user or from a web form.
    The PHP language also allows the contents of a file to be imported into the
program text using the include statement. The name of the file is an arbitrary
string which may be computed or read in at runtime. The result is that any file
can be included in the text of the program, even one that has just been created by
the program. Thus, the include statement is potentially just as flexible as the eval
statement for arbitrarily modifying program state.
    Both of these may be modelled using the same string analysis techniques as
discussed in Sect. 24.4.1. The eval statement may also be handled using profiling,
356                                                               P. Biggar and D. Gregg

which restricts the set of possible eval statements to those which actually are used
in practice.

24.4.3 Object Handlers

PHP’s reference implementation allows classes to be partially written in C. Objects
that are instantiations of these classes can have special behaviour in certain cases.
For example, the objects may be dereferenced using array syntax. Or a special
handler function may be called when the variable holding the object is read or
written to.
   The handler functions for these special cases are generally unrestricted, meaning
that they can contain arbitrary C code that does anything the programmer chooses.
Being written in C, they are given access to the entire program state, including all
local and global variables.
   These two characteristics of handlers make them very powerful but break any
attempts at function-at-a-time analysis. If one of these objects is passed into a
function and is read, it may overwrite all variables in the local symbol table.
The overwritten variables might then have the same handlers. These can then be
returned from the function or passed to any other called functions (indeed, it can
also call any function). This means that a single unconstrained variable in a function
can propagate to any other point in the program, and we need to treat this case
conservatively.

24.5 Concluding Remarks and Further Reading

In this chapter, we have described our experience of building SSA in PHC, an ahead-
of-time compiler for PHP. PHP is quite different to static languages such as C/C++
and Java. In addition to dynamic typing, it has other dynamic features such as very
flexible and powerful reference types, variable-variables, and features that allow
almost arbitrary code to be executed.
    The main result of our experience is to show that SSA cannot be used as an end-
to-end intermediate representation (IR) for a PHP compiler. The main reason is that
in order to build SSA, significant analysis of the PHP program is needed to deal
with aliasing and to rule out potential arbitrary updates of variables. We have found
that in real PHP programs these features are seldom used in ways that make analysis
really difficult [28]. But analysis is nonetheless necessary to show the absence of the
bad use of these features.
    In principle, our analysis could perform only the alias analysis prior to building
SSA and perform type analysis and constant propagation in SSA. But our experience
is that combining all three analyses greatly improves the precision of alias analysis.
24 Building SSA in a Compiler for PHP                                             357

In particular, type analysis significantly reduces the number of possible method
callees in object-oriented PHP programs.
   Once built, the SSA representation forms a platform for further analysis and
optimization. For example, we have used it to implement an aggressive dead-
code elimination pass which can eliminate both regular assignments and reference
assignments.
   In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in the static analysis
of scripting languages, with a particular focus on detecting potential security
weaknesses in web-based PHP programs. For example, Jovanovic et al. [156]
describe an analysis of PHP to detect vulnerabilities that allow the injection of
executable code into a PHP program by a user or web form. Jensen et al. describe
an alias analysis algorithm for JavaScript, which works quite differently to ours [28]
but works well for JavaScript [150].
   To our knowledge, we are the first to investigate building SSA in a PHP compiler.
Our initial results show that building a reasonably precise SSA for PHP requires a
great deal of analysis. Nonetheless, as languages such as PHP are used to build a
growing number of web applications, we expect that there will be an increasing
interest in tools for the static analysis of scripting languages.
Further Reading
The HSSA algorithm is described further in Chap. 16. Array SSA form—as
described in Chap. 17—was also considered for our algorithm. While we deemed
HSSA a better match for the problem space, we believe we could also have adapted
Array SSA for this purpose.
    Our propagation algorithm is based on the Conditional Constant Propagation
algorithm by Pioli and Hind [227]. It was also based on the SSA-based cousin of
CCP, Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation (SSA-CCP). SSA-CCP is described
earlier, in Chaps. 8 and 17.
    Our type-inference algorithm is based on the work by Lenart [181], which itself
is based on SSA-CCP.
    The variant of CCP on which we based our analysis considers alias analysis [110]
alongside constant propagation. Our alias analysis was based on “points-to” analysis
by Emami et al. [110]. A more detailed analysis of our alias analysis and how it
interacts with constant propagation is available [28]. Previous work also looked at
alias analysis in PHP, taking a simpler approach to analyse a subset of PHP [156].
    Further propagation algorithms can lead to a more precise analysis. In particular,
we believe string analysis, based on the work by Wassermann and Su [302], can
help reduce the set of possible variables in an alias set.
    This chapter is based on original research by Biggar [28], containing more
discussion on our alias analysis, our form of SSA construction, and the problem
of static analysis of dynamic scripting languages.
