Chapter 1. Introduction
This document describes the proposed vector cryptography extensions for RISC-V. All instructions
proposed here are based on the Vector registers. The instructions are designed to be highly
performant, with large application and server-class cores being the main target. A companion
document Volume I: Scalar & Entropy Source Instructions, describes cryptographic instruction
proposals for smaller cores which do not implement the vector extension.

1.1. Intended Audience
Cryptography is a specialized subject, requiring people with many different backgrounds to
cooperate in its secure and efficient implementation. Where possible, we have written this
specification to be understandable by all, though we recognize that the motivations and references
to algorithms or other specifications and standards may be unfamiliar to those who are not domain
experts.

This specification anticipates being read and acted on by various people with different
backgrounds. We have tried to capture these backgrounds here, with a brief explanation of what
we expect them to know, and how it relates to the specification. We hope this aids people’s
understanding of which aspects of the specification are particularly relevant to them, and which
they may (safely!) ignore or pass to a colleague.

Cryptographers and cryptographic software developers
   These are the people we expect to write code using the instructions in this specification. They
   should understand the motivations for the instructions we include, and be familiar with most of
   the algorithms and outside standards to which we refer.

Computer architects
   We do not expect architects to have a cryptography background. We nonetheless expect
   architects to be able to examine our instructions for implementation issues, understand how the
   instructions will be used in context, and advise on how best to fit the functionality the
   cryptographers want.

Digital design engineers & micro-architects
   These are the people who will implement the specification inside a core. Again, no cryptography
   expertise is assumed, but we expect them to interpret the specification and anticipate any
   hardware implementation issues, e.g., where high-frequency design considerations apply, or
   where latency/area tradeoffs exist etc. In particular, they should be aware of the literature
   around efficiently implementing AES and SM4 SBoxes in hardware.

Verification engineers
   These people are responsible for ensuring the correct implementation of the extensions in
   hardware. No cryptography background is assumed. We expect them to identify interesting test
   cases from the specification. An understanding of their real-world usage will help with this.

These are by no means the only people concerned with the specification, but they are the ones we
considered most while writing it.

1.2. Sail Specifications
RISC-V maintains a formal model of the ISA specification, implemented in the Sail ISA specification
language [1]. Note that Sail refers to the specification language itself, and that there is a model of
RISC-V, written using Sail.

It was our intention to include actual Sail code in this specification. However, the Vector Crypto Sail
model needs the Vector Sail model as a basis on which to build. This Vector Cryptography
extensions specification was completed before there was an approved RISC-V Vector Sail Model.
Therefore, we don’t have any Sail code to include in the instruction descriptions. Instead we have
included Sail-like pseudo code. While we have endeavored to adhere to Sail syntax, we have taken
some liberties for the sake of simplicity where we believe that that our intent is clear to the reader.

                Where variables are concatenated, the order shown is how they would appear in a
                vector register from left to right. For example, an element group specified as {a,
               b, e, f} would appear in a vector register with a having the highest element index
                of the group and f having the lowest index of the group.

For the sake of brevity, our pseudo code does not include the handling of masks or tail elements. We
follow the undisturbed and agnostic policies for masks and tails as described in the RISC-V "V"
Vector Extension specification. Furthermore, the code does not explicitly handle overlap and SEW
constraints; these are, however, explicitly stated in the text.

In many cases the pseudo code includes calls to supporting functions which are too verbose to
include directly in the specification. This supporting code is listed in Appendix C.

The Sail Manual is recommended reading in order to best understand the code snippets. Also, the
The Sail Programming Language: A Sail Cookbook is a good reference that is in the process of being
written.

For the latest RISC-V Sail model, refer to the formal model Github repository.

1.3. Policies
In creating this proposal, we tried to adhere to the following policies:

    • Where there is a choice between: 1) supporting diverse implementation strategies for an
     algorithm or 2) supporting a single implementation style which is more performant / less
     expensive; the vector crypto extensions will pick the more constrained but performant option.
     This fits a common pattern in other parts of the RISC-V specifications, where recommended (but
     not required) instruction sequences for performing particular tasks are given as an example,
     such that both hardware and software implementers can optimize for only a single use-case.

    • The extensions will be designed to support existing standardized cryptographic constructs well.
     It will not try to support proposed standards, or cryptographic constructs which exist only in
     academia. Cryptographic standards which are settled upon concurrently with or after the RISC-
     V vector cryptographic extensions standardization will be dealt with by future RISC-V vector
     cryptographic standard extensions.

 • Historically, there has been some discussion [4] on how newly supported operations in general-
   purpose computing might enable new bases for cryptographic algorithms. The standard will not
   try to anticipate new useful low-level operations which may be useful as building blocks for
   future cryptographic constructs.

 • Regarding side-channel countermeasures: Where relevant, proposed instructions must aim to
   remove the possibility of any timing side-channels. All instructions shall be implemented with
   data-independent timing. That is, the latency of the execution of these instructions shall not
   vary with different input values.

1.4. Element Groups
Many vector crypto instructions operate on operands that are wider than elements (which are
currently limited to 64 bits wide). Typically, these operands are 128- and 256-bits wide. In many
cases, these operands are comprised of smaller operands that are combined (for example, each
SHA-2 operand is comprised of 4 words). However, in other cases these operands are a single value
(for example, in the AES round instructions, each operand is 128-bit block or round key).

We treat these operands as a vector of one or more element groups as defined in the RISC-V Vector
Element Groups specification.

Each vector crypto instruction that operates on element groups explicitly specifies their three
defining parameters: EGW, EGS, and EEW.

Instruction Group Extension EGW EEW EGS

AES                   Zvkned       128    32    4

SHA256                zvknh[ab] 128       32    4

SHA512                zvknhb       256    64    4

GCM                   Zvkg         128    32    4

SM4                   Zvksed       128    32    4

SM3                   Zvksh        256    32    8

                 • Element Group Width (EGW) - total number of bits in an element group

                • Effective Element Width (EEW) - number of bits in each element

                 • Element Group Size (EGS) - number of elements in an element group

For all of the vector crypto instructions in this specification, EEW=SEW.

               The required SEW for each cryptographic instruction was chosen to match what is
              typically needed for other instructions when implementing the targeted algorithm.

 • A Vector Element Group is a vector of one or more element groups.

 • A Scalar Element Group is a single element group.

Element groups can be formed across registers in implementations where VLEN< EGW by using an

LMUL>1.

                Since the the vector extension for application processors requires a minimum
                of VLEN of 128, at most such implementations would require LMUL=2 to form the
                largest element groups in this specification.

                However, implementations with a smaller VLEN, such as embedded designs, will
                requires a larger LMUL to form the necessary element groups. It is important to
                keep in mind that this reduces the number of register groups available such that it
               may be difficult or impossible to write efficient code for the intended
                cryptographic algorithms.

                For example, an implementation with VLEN=32 would need to set LMUL=8 to create a
                256-bit element group for SM3. This would mean that there would only be 4 register
                groups, 3 of which would be consumed by a single SM3 message-expansion
                instruction.

As with all vector instructions, the number of elements processed is specified by the vector length
vl. The number of element groups operated upon is then vl/EGS. Likewise the starting element
group is vstart/EGS. See Section 1.5 for limitations on vl and vstart for vector crypto instructions.

1.5. Instruction Constraints
The following is a quick reference for the various constraints of specific Vector Crypto instructions.

vl and vstart constraints
    Since vl and vstart refer to elements, Vector Crypto instructions that use elements groups (See
    Section 1.4) require that these values are an integer multiple of the Element Group Size (EGS).

     • Instructions that violate the vl or vstart requirements are reserved.

Instructions EGS

vaes*           4

vsha2*          4

vgh*            4

vsm3*           8

vsm4*           4

LMUL constraints
    For element-group instructions, LMUL*VLEN must always be at least as large as EGW, otherwise an
    illegal instruction exception is raised, even if vl=0.

Instructions SEW EGW

vaes*           32     128

vsha2*          32     128

Instructions SEW EGW

vsha2*          64        256

vgh*            32        128

vsm3*           32        256

vsm4*           32        128

SEW constraints
   Some Vector Crypto instructions are only defined for a specific SEW. In such a case all other SEW
   values are reserved.

Instructions         Required SEW

vaes*                32

Zvknha: vsha2* 32

Zvknhb: vsha2* 32 or 64

vclmul[h]            64

vgh*                 32

vsm3*                32

vsm4*                32

Source/Destination overlap constraints
   Some Vector Crypto instructions have overlap constraints. Encodings that violate these
   constraints are reserved.

In the case of the .vs instructions defined in this specification, vs2 holds a 128-bit scalar element
group. For implementations with VLEN ≥ 128, vs2 refers to a single register. Thus, the vd register
group must not overlap the vs2 register. However, in implementations where VLEN < 128, vs2 refers
to a register group comprised of the number of registers needed to hold the 128-bit scalar element
group. In this case, the vd register group must not overlap this vs2 register group.

Instruction Register Cannot Overlap

vaes*.vs       vs2          vd

vsm4r.vs       vs2          vd

vsha2c[hl]     vs1, vs2     vd

vsha2ms        vs1, vs2     vd

sm3me          vs2          vd

vsm3c          vs2          vd

1.6. Vector-Scalar Instructions
The RISC-V Vector Extension defines three encodings for Vector-Scalar operations which get their

scalar operand from a GPR or FP register:

    • OPIVX: Scalar GPR x register

    • OPFVF: Scalar FP f register

    • OPMVX: Scalar GPR x register

However, the Vector Extensions include Vector Reduction Operations which can also be considered
Vector-Scalar operations because a scalar operand is provided from element 0 of vector register vs1.
The vector operand is provided in vector register group vs2. These reduction operations all use the
.vs suffix in their mnemonics. Additionally, the reduction operations all produce a scalar result in
element 0 of the destination register, vd.

The Vector Crypto Extensions define Vector-Scalar instructions that are similar to these Vector
Reduction Operations in that they get a scalar operand from a vector register. However, they differ
in that they get a scalar element group (see Section 1.4) from vs2 and they return vector results to
vd, which is also a source vector operand. These Vector-Scalar crypto instructions also use the .vs
suffix in their mnemonics.

                We chose to use vs2 as the scalar operand, and vd as the vector operand, so that we
                could use the vs1 specifier as additional encoding bits for these instructions. This
               allows these instructions to have a much smaller encoding footprint, leaving more
                rooms for other instructions in the future.

These instructions enable a single key, specified as a scalar element group in vs2, to be applied to
each element group of register group vd.

                Scalar element groups will occupy at most a single register in application
               processors. However, in implementations where VLEN<128, they will occupy 2
                (VLEN=64) or 4 (VLEN=32) registers.

                It is common for multiple AES encryption rounds (for example) to be performed in
                parallel with the same round key (e.g. in counter modes). Rather than having to
               first splat the common key across the whole vector group, these vector-scalar
                crypto instructions allow the round key to be specified as a scalar element group.

1.7. Software Portability
The following contains some guidelines that enable the portability of vector-crypto-based code to
implementations with different values for VLEN

Application Processors
     Application processors are expected to follow the V-extension and will therefore have VLEN ≥ 128.

Since most of the cryptography-specific instructions have an EGW=128, nothing special needs to be
done for these instructions to support implementations with VLEN=128.

However, the SHA-512 and SM3 instructions have an EGW=256. Implementations with VLEN = 128,

require that LMUL is doubled for these instructions in order to create 256-bit elements across a pair
of registers. Code written with this doubling of LMUL will not affect the results returned by
implementations with VLEN ≥ 256 because vl controls how many element groups are processed.
Therefore, we recommend that libraries that implement SHA-512 and SM3 employ this doubling of
LMUL to ensure that the software can run on all implementation with VLEN ≥ 128.

While the doubling of LMUL for these instructions is safe for implementations with VLEN ≥ 256, it may
be less optimal as it will result in unnecessary register pressure and might exact a performance
penalty in some microarchitectures. Therefore, we suggest that in addition to providing portable
code for SHA-512 and SM3, libraries should also include more optimal code for these instructions
when VLEN ≥ 256.

Algorithm Instructions VLEN LMUL

SHA-512      vsha2*         64     vl/2

SM3          vsm3*          32     vl/4

Embedded Processors
   Embedded processors will typically have implementations with VLEN < 128. This will require
   code to be written with larger LMUL values to enable the element groups to be formed.

The .vs instructions require scalar element groups of EGW=128. On implementations with VLEN < 128,
these scalar element groups will necessarily be formed across registers. This is different from most
scalars in vector instructions that typically consume part of a single register.

We recommend that different code be available for VLEN=32 and VLEN=64, as code written for
VLEN=32 will likely be too burdensome for VLEN=64 implementations.

