Preface
      This preface introduces the Armv8-M Architecture Reference Manual. It contains the following sections:
      About this manual.
      Using this manual.
      Conventions.
      Additional reading.
      Feedback.

                                                  xxxix
About this manual
      This manual documents the microcontroller profile of version 8 of the Arm Architecture, the Armv8-M architecture
      profile. For short definitions of all the Armv8 profiles, see A1.2 About the Armv8 architecture, and architecture
      profiles.
      This manual has the following parts:
      Part A Provides an introduction to the Armv8-M architecture.
      Part B Describes the architectural rules.
      Part C Describes the T32 instruction set.
      Part D Describes the registers.
      Part E Describes the Armv8-M pseudocode.
      Part F Describes the packet protocols.

                                                      xl
Using this manual
      The information in this manual is organized into parts, as described in this section.
      Part A, Armv8-M Architecture Introduction and Overview
      Part A gives an overview of the Armv8-M architecture profile, including its relationship to the other Arm PE
      architectures. It introduces the terminology that describes the architecture, and gives an overview of the optional
      architectural extensions. It contains the following chapter:
      Chapter A1 Introduction
           Read this for an introduction to the Armv8-M architecture.
      Part B, Armv8-M Architecture Rules
      Part B describes the architecture rules. It contains the following chapters:
      Chapter B1 Resets
           Read this for a description of the reset rules.
      Chapter B2 Power Management
           Read this for a description of the power management rules.
      Chapter B3 Programmers’ Model
           Read this for a description of the programmers model rules.
      Chapter B4 Floating-point Support
           Read this for a description of the floating-point support rules.
      Chapter B5 Vector Extension
           Read this for a description of the Vector Extension support rules.
      Chapter B7 Memory Model
           Read this for a description of the memory model rules.
      Chapter B8 The System Address Map
           Read this for a description of the system address map rules.
      Chapter B9 Synchronization and Semaphores
           Read this for a description of the rules on non-blocking synchronization of shared memory.
      Chapter B10 The Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture
           Read this for a description of the protected memory system architecture rules.
      Chapter B11 The System Timer, SysTick
           Read this for a description of the system timer rules.
      Chapter B12 Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller
           Read this for a description of the Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) rules.
      Chapter B13 Debug
           Read this for a description of the debug rules.

                                                        xli
Preface
Using this manual

              Chapter B14 Debug and Trace Components
                    Read this for a description of the debug and trace component rules.
              Chapter B15 The Performance Monitors Extension
                    Read this for a description of the Performance Monitors Extension.
              Chapter B16 Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Extension
                    Read this for a description of the Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Extension.
              Part C, Armv8-M Instructions
              Part C describes the instructions. It contains the following chapters:
              Chapter C1 Instruction Set Overview
                    Read this for an overview of the instruction set and the instruction set encoding.
              Chapter C2 Instruction Specification
                    Read this for a description of each instruction, arranged by instruction mnemonic.
              Part D, Armv8-M Registers
              Part D describes the registers. It contains the following chapter:
              Chapter D1 Register and Payload Specification
                    Read this for a description of the registers.
              Part E, Armv8-M Pseudocode
              Part E describes the pseudocode. It contains the following chapters:
              Chapter E1 Arm Pseudocode Definition
                    Read this for a definition of the pseudocode that Arm documentation uses.
              Chapter E2 Pseudocode Specification
                    Read this for a description of the pseudocode.
              Part F, Packet Protocols
              Part F describes the packet protocols. It contains the following chapter:
              Chapter F1 ITM and DWT Packet Protocol Specification
                    Read this for a description of the protocol for packets that are used to send the data generated by the
                    ITM and DWT to an external debugger.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     xlii
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Conventions
          The following sections describe conventions that this manual can use:
          Typographical conventions.
          Signals.
          Numbers.
          Pseudocode descriptions.
          Assembler syntax descriptions.

Typographical conventions

          The typographical conventions are:
          italic
          Introduces special terminology, and denotes citations.
          bold
          Denotes signal names, and is used for terms in descriptive lists, where appropriate.
          monospace

          Used for assembler syntax descriptions, pseudocode, and source code examples.
          Also used in the main text for instruction mnemonics and for references to other items appearing in assembler
          syntax descriptions, pseudocode, and source code examples.
          SMALLCAPS

          Used for a few terms that have specific technical meanings, and that are included in the Glossary.
          Colored text Indicates a link. This can be:
                     • A URL, for example https://developer.arm.com/.
                     • A cross-reference, that includes the page number of the referenced information if it is not on the current
                       page, for example, Chapter B2 Power Management.
                     • A link, to a chapter or appendix, or to a glossary entry, or to the section of the manual that defines the
                       colored term, for example tail-chaining.

Signals

          In general this manual does not define processor signals, but it does include some signal examples and
          recommendations.
          The signal conventions are:
          Signal level The level of an asserted signal depends on whether the signal is active-HIGH or active-LOW. Asserted
               means:
                     • HIGH for active-HIGH signals.
                     • LOW for active-LOW signals.

                                                             xliii
Preface
Conventions

              Lowercase n At the start or end of a signal name denotes an active-LOW signal.

Numbers

              Numbers are normally written in decimal. Binary numbers are preceded by 0b, and hexadecimal numbers by 0x.
              In both cases, the prefix and the associated value are written in a monospace font, for example 0xFFFF0000.
              For both binary and hexadecimal numbers, where a bit is represented by the letter x, the value is irrelevant. For
              example a value expressed as 0b1x can be either 0b11 or 0b10.
              To improve readability, long numbers can be written with an underscore separator between every four characters,
              for example 0xFFFF_0000_0000_0000. Ignore any underscores when interpreting the value of a number.

Pseudocode descriptions

              This manual uses a form of pseudocode to provide precise descriptions of the specified functionality. This
              pseudocode is written in a monospace font, and is described in Chapter E1 Arm Pseudocode Definition.

Assembler syntax descriptions

              This manual contains numerous syntax descriptions for assembler instructions and for components of assembler
              instructions. These are shown in a monospace font, and use the conventions described in C1.2.5 Standard
              assembler syntax fields.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   xliv
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
Additional reading
          This section lists relevant publications from Arm and third parties.
          See https://developer.arm.com, for access to Arm documentation.

Arm publications

             • Arm® Debug Interface Architecture Specification ADIv5.0 to ADIv5.2 (ARM IHI 0031).
             • Arm® Debug Interface Architecture Specification ADIv6.0 (ARM IHI 0074).
             • Arm® CoreSight™ Architecture Specification (ARM IHI 0029).
             • Arm® Embedded Trace Macrocell Architecture Specification ETMv4 (ARM IHI 0064).
             • Embedded Trace Macrocell® ETMv3 Architecture Specification (ARM IHI 0014).
             • Arm® v6-M Architecture Reference Manual (ARM DDI 0419).
             • Arm® v7-M Architecture Reference Manual (ARM DDI 0403).
             • Arm® Architecture Reference Manual, for A-profile architecture (ARM DDI 0487).
             • Arm® Armv8-M Faults on Instruction Fetch (ARM DDI 0624).
             • Arm® Armv8-M Faults on Exception Handling (ARM DDI 0625).

Other publications

          The following publications are referred to in this manual, or provide more information:
             • ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985 and ANSI/IEEE Std 754-2008, IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point
               Arithmetic. Unless otherwise indicated, references to IEEE 754 refer to either issue of the standard.
                    Note
                    This manual does not adopt the terminology defined in the 2008 issue of the standard.
             • JEP106, Standard Manufacturers Identification Code, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association.

                                                          xlv
Feedback
         Arm welcomes feedback on its documentation.

Feedback on this manual

         If you have any comments or suggestions for additions and improvements, create a ticket at https://support.
         developer.arm.com
            • The title, Armv8-M Architecture Reference Manual.
            • The number, DDI0553B.y
            • The section name to which your comments refer.
            • The rule identifier(s) to which your comments apply, if applicable.
            • A concise explanation of your comments.
         Arm also welcomes general suggestions for additions and improvements.
              Note
              Arm tests PDFs only in Adobe Acrobat and Acrobat Reader, and cannot guarantee the appearance or
              behavior of any manual when viewed with any other PDF reader.

Inclusive Terminology Commitment

         Arm values inclusive communities. Arm recognizes that we and our industry have used terms that can be offensive.
         Arm strives to lead the industry and to create change.
         Previous issues of this manual included terms that can be offensive. We have replaced these terms.
         If you find offensive terms in this manual, please contact terms@arm.com.

                                                        xlvi
