                                       Part A
Armv8-M Architecture Introduction and Overview
Chapter A1
Introduction

             This chapter introduces the Armv8 architecture, the architecture profiles it defines, and the Armv8-M architecture
             profile defined by this manual. It contains the following sections:
             A1.1 Architecture refernce manual layout and terminology.
             A1.2 About the Armv8 architecture, and architecture profiles.
             A1.3 The Armv8-M architecture profile.

DDI0553B.y                  Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     48
ID09082024                                            Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.1. Architecture refernce manual layout and terminology

A1.1 Architecture refernce manual layout and terminology

              This section describes the structure and scope of this architecture reference manual. This section also describes the
              terminology that this architecture reference manual uses. It does not constitute part of the architecture reference
              manual, and must not be interpreted as implementation guidance.

A1.1.1 Structure of the architecture reference manual

              This architecture reference manual describes the behavior of the processing element as a set of individual rules.
              Each rule is clearly identified by the letter R, followed by a random group of subscript letters that do not reflect any
              intended order or priority, for example RBSHJ . In the following example, RBSHJ is simply a random rule identifier
              that has no significance apart from uniquely identifying a rule in this manual.

                                                          Identifier                                   Rule

                                                            RBSHJ          The following data accesses are single-copy atomic:
                                                                              All byte accesses.
                                                                              All halfword accesses to halfword-aligned locations.
                                                                              All word accesses to word-aligned locations.
                                                                           Applies to an implementation of the architecture from Armv8.0-M onwards

                                                                                                    Additional Information

              Rules must not be read in isolation, and where more than one rule relating to a particular feature exists, individual
              rules are grouped into sections and subsections to provide the proper context. Where appropriate, these sections
              contain a short introduction to aid the reader.
              An implementation that conforms to all the rules described in this manual constitutes an Armv8-M compliant
              implementation. An implementation whose behavior deviates from these rules is not compliant with the Armv8-M
              architecture.
              Some sections contain additional information and guidance that do not constitute rules. This information and
              guidance is provided purely as an aid to understanding the architecture. Information statements are clearly
              identified by the letter I, followed by a random group of subscript letters, for example IPRTD .
              A line below each rule or information statement gives additional information indicating the architecture version, the
              extensions that are required for the rule or information statement to apply, and any other notes. Some extensions
              depend on the implementation of other extensions, for example FP.
                    Note
                    Arm strongly recommends that implementers read all chapters and sections of this architecture reference
                    manual to ensure that an implementation is compliant.
              An implementation that conforms to all the rules described in this architecture reference manual but chooses to
              ignore any additional information and guidance is compliant with the Armv8-M architecture.
              In the following parts of this architecture reference manual, architectural rules are not identified by a specific prefix
              and a random group of subscript letters:
                 • Parts of Chapter B15 The Performance Monitors Extension.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                                            49
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.1. Architecture refernce manual layout and terminology

              Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

                 • Parts of Part C Armv8-M Instruction Set.
                 • Part D Armv8-M Register and Payload Specification.
                 • Part E Armv8-M Pseudocode.
                 • Part F Armv8-M Debug Packet Protocols.

A1.1.2 Scope of the architecture reference manual

              This architecture reference manual contains only rules and information that relate specifically to the Armv8-M
              architecture. It does not include any information about other Arm architectures, nor does it describe similarities
              between Armv8-M and other architectures.
              Readers must not assume that the rules provided in this manual are applicable to an Armv7-M or Armv6-M
              implementation, nor must they assume that the rules that are applicable to an Armv7-M or Armv6-M
              implementation are equally applicable to an Armv8-M implementation.

A1.1.3 Intended audience

              This manual is written for users who want to design, implement, or program an Armv8-M PE in a range of
              Arm-compliant implementations from simple uniprocessor implementations to complex multiprocessor systems. It
              does not assume familiarity with previous versions of the M-Profile architecture.
              The architecture reference manual provides a precise, accurate, and correct set of rules that must be followed in
              order for an Armv8-M implementation to be architecturally compliant. It is an explicit reference manual, and not a
              general introduction to, or user guide for, the Armv8-M architecture.

A1.1.4 Terminology, phrases

              This subsection identifies some standard words and phrases that are used in the Arm architecture documentation.
              These words and phrases have an Arm-specific definition, which is described in this section.
              Architecturally visible
              Something that is visible to the controlling agent. The controlling agent might be software.
              Arm recommends
              A particular usage that ensures consistency and usability. Following all the rules listed in this manual leads to a
              predictable outcome that is compliant with the architecture, but might produce an unexpected output. Adhering to
              a recommendation ensures that the output is as expected.
              Arm strongly recommends
              Something that is essentially mandatory, but that is outside the scope of the architecture described in this manual.
              Failing to adhere to a strong recommendation can break the system, although the PE itself remains compliant with
              the architecture that is described in this manual.
              Finite time
              An action will occur at some point in the future. Finite time does not make any statement about the time involved.
              However, delaying an action longer than is absolutely necessary might have an adverse impact on performance.
              Permitted
              Allowed behavior.
              Required

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      50
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.1. Architecture refernce manual layout and terminology

              Mandatory behavior.
              Support
              The implementation has implemented a particular feature.

A1.1.5 Terminology, Armv8-M specific terms

              For definitions of Armv8-M specific terms, see the Glossary.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   51
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.2. About the Armv8 architecture, and architecture profiles

A1.2 About the Armv8 architecture, and architecture profiles

              Armv8-M is documented as one of a set of architecture profiles.
              Arm defines three architecture profiles:
              A      Application profile:
                  • Supports a Virtual Memory System Architecture (VMSA) based on a Memory Management Unit (MMU).
                  • Supports the A64, A32, and T32 instruction sets.
              R      Real-time profile:
                  • Supports the AArch64 or AArch32 Execution states.
                  • Supports A64, or A32 and T32 instruction sets.
                  • Supports a Protected Memory System Architecture (PMSA) based on a Memory Protection Unit (MPU).
                  • Supports a VMSA.
              M      Microcontroller profile, described in this manual:
                  • Implements a programmers’ model designed for low-latency interrupt processing, with hardware stacking of
                    registers and support for writing interrupt handlers in high-level languages.
                  • Optionally implements a variant of the PMSA based on an MPU.
                  • Supports a variant of the T32 instruction set.
              This Architecture Reference Manual describes only the Armv8-M profile.

DDI0553B.y                     Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               52
ID09082024                                               Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.3. The Armv8-M architecture profile

A1.3 The Armv8-M architecture profile

              The M-Profile architecture includes:
                 • The opportunity to include simple pipeline designs offering leading edge system performance levels in a
                   broad range of markets and applications.
                 • Highly deterministic operation:
                     – Single or low cycle count execution.
                     – Minimal interrupt latency, with short pipelines.
                     – Capable of cacheless operation.
                 • Excellent targeting of C/C++ code. This aligns with the Arm programming standards in this area:
                     – Exception handlers are standard C/C++ functions, entered using standard calling conventions.
                 • Design support for deeply embedded systems:
                     – Low pincount devices.
                 • Support for debug and software profiling for event-driven systems.
              A line below each rule or information statement indicates the architecture version, the extensions that are required
              for the rule or information statement to apply, and any other notes. Some extensions depend on the implementation
              of other extensions, for example FP.

A1.3.1 The Armv8-M instruction set

              Armv8-M only supports execution of T32 instructions.
              For more information about the instructions, see Chapter C1 Instruction Set Overview and Chapter C2, Instruction
              Specification.

A1.3.2 Baseline implementation

              The simplest Armv8.0-M implementation, without any of the optional extensions, is a Baseline implementation.
              The Armv8.0-M Baseline offers improvements over previous M-Profile architectures in the following areas:
                 • An improved Memory Protection Unit (MPU) model.
                 • Alignment with Armv8-A and Armv8-R memory types.
                 • Stack pointer limit checking.
                 • Improved support for multi-processing.
                 • Better alignment with C11 and C11++ standards.
                 • Enhanced debug capabilities.
              In this architecture reference manual a Baseline implementation is referred to as an implementation without the
              Main Extension.
              If an implementation does not include the Main Extension CPUID.Architecture reads as 0b1100.
              Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

A1.3.3 Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller

              The Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC) can support up to 496 external interrupts. The NVIC is always
              implemented and is used for:
                 • Integrated interrupts.
                 • Exception handling.
                 • Priority management.
                 • Automatic vectoring.
                 • Automatic state preservation.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      53
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.3. The Armv8-M architecture profile

              For more information see Chapter B12 Nested Vectored Interrupt Controller.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.   54
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.4. Optional Extensions

A1.4 Optional Extensions

A1.4.1 CDE - The Custom Datapath Extension

             The Custom Datapath Extension is an OPTIONAL feature available from the Armv8-M architecture. An
             implementation that includes the Custom Datapath Extension must implement all of the features that are required
             by the Main Extension (M), and might implement the following OPTIONAL features:
                 • The features that are provided by the Floating-point Extension (FP).
                 • The features that are provided by the Armv8.1 M Vector Extension (MVE).
              CDE Instructions that operate on the S or D register file require either FP or MVE. CDE Instructions that operate
              on the Q register file require MVE.
              For more information see B3.37 The Custom Datapath Extension.
                   Note
                   The Custom Datapath Extension can also be referred to as Arm Custom Instructions for Armv8-M.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

A1.4.2 Debug

             The Armv8-M architecture introduces:
                 • Enhanced breakpoint and watchpoint functionality.
                 • Improvements to the Instrumentation Trace Macrocell (ITM).
                 • Comprehensive trace and self-hosted debug extensions to make embedded software easier to debug and trace.
              Halting debug (HDBG) is an OPTIONAL feature that allows the debugger to halt the PE.
             The following OPTIONAL peripherals might be implemented:
                 • The Data Trace and Watchpoint Unit - a memory-mapped peripheral providing two options:
                     – Comparators and watchpoints for data, instruction and address matching (DWTD).
                     – Trace packet generation (DWTT).
                 • The Embedded Trace Macrocell Unit - a memory-mapped peripheral providing trace information (ETM).
                 • The Instrumentation Trace Macrocell Unit - a memory-mapped interface for the generation of instrumentation
                   trace packets (ITM).
                 • The Flash Patch and Breakpoint Unit - a memory-mapped peripheral providing breakpoints (FPB).
                 • The Trace Port Interface Unit - a memory-mapped peripheral providing an output path and trace sink for the
                   DWT, ETM and ITM (TPIU).
             The Main Extension is required to generate trace packets.
              Support for the Armv8-M debug architecture is indicated in ID_DFR0.MProfDbg.
              For more information see B13.1 Debug feature overview.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

              In an Armv8.1-M implementation, the optional Unprivileged Debug Extension adds support for unprivileged debug.
              UDE requires the Main Extension, (M), to be implemented.
             The restrictions on access to a number of registers is relaxed to allow a debugger to write to the register when the
             PE is not in Debug state.
              Support for the Armv8-M debug architecture is indicated in ID_DFR0.UDE.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      55
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.4. Optional Extensions

             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

              For more information about debug, see Chapter B13 Debug and Chapter B14 Debug and Trace Components.

A1.4.3 DSP - The Digital Signal Processing Extension.

             The Digital Signal Procession Extension, DSP, is an OPTIONAL feature. The DSP adds support for SIMD
             instructions.
             A PE that implements the DSP Extension must implement the Main Extension (M).
              Support for DSP is indicated in the following registers:
                 • ID_ISAR1.
                 • ID_ISAR2.
                 • ID_ISAR3.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

A1.4.4 The DSP Debug Extension

             Armv8.1-M adds OPTIONAL debug support for the DSP.
              If the DSP Debug Extension, DSPDE, is implemented, the following features must also be implemented:
                 • Halting debug, HDBG.
                 • The Main Extension, M.
                 • The Digital Signal Processing Extension, DSP.
              If MVE and DWTD are implemented then DSPDE must be implemented.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

A1.4.5 The Floating-point Extension

             A PE that implements the Floating-point Extension must implement the Main Extension (M).
             The Floating-point Extension supports either single-precision floating-point instructions or both single-precision
             and double-precision floating-point instructions.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

              HP - Half-precision floating-point instructions
             The Armv8.1-M architecture extends the Floating-point extension to include half-precision data types. If
             single-precision data types are implemented, half-precision data types must also be implemented.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

A1.4.6 The Main Extension

             A PE that implements the Main Extension implements the System Timer Extension.
                   Note
                      • A PE with the Main Extension is also referred to as a Mainline implementation.
                      • A PE without the Main Extension is also referred to as a Baseline implementation. A
                        Baseline implementation has a subset of the instructions, registers, and features, of a Mainline
                        implementation.
                      • Armv7-M compatibility requires the Main Extension.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    56
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.4. Optional Extensions

                     • Armv6-M compatibility is provided by all Armv8-M implementations.
              Support for the Main Extension is indicated in CPUID.Architecture.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.0-M onward.

A1.4.7 MPU model

             The Armv8-M architecture provides a system address map and permits implementations to include an OPTIONAL
             MPU. The optional MPU uses the Protected Memory System Architecture (PMSAv8) and contains improved
             flexibility in the MPU region definition.
             The Armv8.1-M architecture introduces a further attribute for MPU regions, MPU_RLAR.PXN.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

              For further information see Chapter B10 The Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture.

A1.4.8 M-Profile Vector Extension, MVE

             This extension provides operations on various SIMD data types.
              It consists of MVE-I (integer) and MVE-F (floating-point).
             A PE that implements MVE-I requires the features that are provided by the Main Extension, (M), and the DSP
             Extension (DSP).
             A PE that implements MVE-F requires the implementation of the Floating-point Extension (FP), and MVE-I.
              For more information see Chapter B5 Vector Extension.
              Support for MVE is indicated in ID_MVFR1.MVE.
                   Note
                   The Armv8-M MVE can also be referred to as Arm Helium™ for Armv8-M.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

A1.4.9 Pointer Authentication and Branch Target Identification Extension

             The OPTIONAL Pointer Authentication and Branch Target Identification Extension (PACBTI) for Armv8.1-M adds
             support for the authentication of the contents of a register before that register is used as a load or as the target of an
             indirect branch, and for the authentication of the stack pointers.
              For more information see Chapter B6 Pointer authentication and branch target identification Extension.
              Support for the PACBTI extension is indicated by ID_ISAR5.PACBTI.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

A1.4.10 Perfomance Monitors Extension

              In an Armv8.1-M implementation, the optional Performance Monitors Extension adds support for a Performance
              Monitor Unit (PMU).
              For more information see Chapter B15 The Performance Monitors Extension.
              Support for the Performance Monitors Extension is indicated by PMU_TYPE.N.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                            57
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
Chapter A1. Introduction
A1.4. Optional Extensions

A1.4.11 Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability

              In an Armv8.1-M implementation, the Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Extension adds additional
              debug support. The minimum RAS Extension is mandatory in an Armv8.1-M implementation.
              For more information see Chapter B16 Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS) Extension.
              Support for RAS is indicated by ID_PFR0.RAS.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

A1.4.12 Security Extension

             The Armv8-M architecture introduces the OPTIONAL Security Extension which provides a mechanism to protect
             sensitive data, areas of memory and other resources. This is achieved through the use of instructions and hardware
             to create a Secure state that is protected from a Non-secure state.
              From Armv8.1-M Thread mode re-entrancy can be disabled on SG instructions.
             Applies to an implementation of the architecture Armv8.1-M onward.

              In a PE with the Main Extension, support for the Security Extension is indicated in ID_PFR1.Security.
                   Note
                   The Armv8-M Security Extension can also be referred to as Arm TrustZone for Armv8-M.

A1.4.13 The System Timer Extension

             The System Timer Extension, also known as SysTick, provides a decrementing, wrap-on-zero, clear-on-write
             counter.
              It is an OPTIONAL feature of a PE without the Main Extension, and it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED if none, one
              or two counters are implemented. If one timer is implemented it is shared between Security states, if the Security
              Extension is implemented. If two timers are implemented each Security state has a dedicated timer.
              In an implementation with the Main Extension one timer is implemented per Security state.
              For more information see Chapter B11 The System Timer, SysTick.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     58
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
