 Part G
Glossary
AAPCS
             Procedure Call Standard for the Arm Architecture.
Additional floating-point context registers
             The Additional floating-point state context registers are as follows:
               • S16 to S31.
             See also: Floating-point context
Additional state context registers
             The Additional state context registers are as follows:
               • R4 to R11.
               • The Integrity Signature.
             See also: State context registers
Address dependency
             An address dependency exists when the value that is returned by a read computes the address of a subsequent
             access. An address dependency exists even if the value that is returned by the first read does not change the address
             of the second read or write.
             See B7.2.3 Ordering and observability
Addressing mode
             Means a method for generating the memory address that is used by a load/store instruction.
Aligned
             A data item that is stored at an address that is exactly divisible by the highest power of 2 that divides exactly into
             its size in bytes. Aligned halfwords, words, and doublewords therefore have addresses that are divisible by 2, 4
             and 8 respectively.
             An aligned access is one where the address of the access is aligned to the size of each element of the access.
Application Program Status Register (APSR)
             The register containing those bits that deliver status information about the results of instructions, the N, Z, C, and
             V bits of the XPSR. In an implementation that includes the DSP extension, the APSR includes the GE bits that
             provide status information from DSP operations.
             See also B3.5 XPSR, APSR, IPSR, and EPSR.
APSR
             See Application Program Status Register.
Architecturally executed
             An instruction is architecturally executed only if it would be executed in a simple sequential execution of the
             program. When such an instruction has been executed and retired it has been architecturally executed. Any
             instruction that, in a simple sequential execution of a program, is treated as a NOP because it fails its condition
             code check, is an architecturally executed instruction.
             In a PE that performs Speculative execution, an instruction is not architecturally executed if the PE discards the
             results of a Speculative execution.
             See also Condition code check, Simple sequential execution.
Architecturally UNKNOWN

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2122
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
               An Architecturally UNKNOWN value is a value that is not defined by the architecture but must meet the requirements
               of the definition of UNKNOWN. Implementations can define the value of the field, but are not required to do so.
               See also IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED.
Architecture tick
               An atomic unit of execution. In the Armv8.0-M architecture, most instructions are considered atomic units for
               execution (they are either performed or not performed). The most notable exceptions are instructions that support
               ICI behavior.
Associativity
               See Cache associativity
Asynchronous exception
               An exception is described as asynchronous if any of the following apply:
                  • The exception is not generated as a result of direct execution or attempted execution of the instruction stream.
                  • The return address presented to the exception handler is not guaranteed to indicate the instruction that caused
                    the exception.
                  • The exception is imprecise.
               See Imprecise exception, Synchronous exception.
Atomicity
               Describes either single-copy atomicity or multi-copy atomicity. B7.2.1 Single-copy atomicity defines these forms
               of atomicity for the Arm architecture.
               See also Multi-copy atomicity, Single-copy atomicity.
Attributability
               A PMU event that is caused by the PE counting the PMU event is Attributable. If an agent other than the PE that is
               counting the PMU events causes a PMU event then that PMU event is Unattributable.
               A PMU event is either Attributable or Unattributable. If the PMU event is Attributable, it is further defined whether
               the PMU event is Attributable to:
                  • The current Security state of the PE.
                  • The privilege level.
                  • When the PE is in Debug state, operations issued to the PE by the Debugger through the external debug
                    interface.
Attribution Unit (AU)
               The combination of the Secure Attribution Unit (SAU) and the Implementation Defined Attribution Unit (IDAU).
               See also Chapter B10 The Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture.
AU
               See Attribution unit.
Availability
               Readiness for correct service.
Background state
               The state of the PE before the last (previous) preemption occurred.
Banked register
               A register that has multiple instances, with the instance that is in use depending on the PE mode, Security state, or
               other PE state.

DDI0553B.y                     Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2123
ID09082024                                               Non-confidential
Base register
             A register that is specified by a load/store instruction that is used as the base value for the address calculation for
             the instruction. Depending on the instruction and its addressing mode, an offset can be added to or subtracted from
             the base register value to form the address that is sent to memory.
Base register Write-Back
             Describes writing back a modified value to the base register used in an address calculation.
Baseboard Management Controller
             A PE dedicated to system control and monitoring.
Beat
             The execution of a 1/4 of an MVE vector operation. Because the vector length is 128 bits, one beat of a vector add
             instruction equates to computing 32 bits of result data. This is independent of lane width. For example, if a lane
             width is 8 bits, then a single beat of a vector add instruction would perform four 8-bit additions.
             See also B5.4 Beats.
Behaves as if
             Where this manual indicates that a PE behaves as if a certain condition applies, all descriptions of the operation
             of the PE must be re-evaluated taking account of that condition, together with any other conditions that affect
             operation.
BF branch point
             The gap between the two instructions. Specifically, the gap between the instruction that immediately precedes the
             instruction at the <b_label> of a BF instruction and the instruction that is identified by the <b_label> of a BF
             instruction..
             See also B3.29 Branch future.
Big-endian memory
             Means that, for example:
                • A byte or halfword at a word-aligned address is the most significant byte or halfword in the word at that
                  address.
                • A byte at a halfword-aligned address is the most significant byte in the halfword at that address.
             See also B7.5 Endianness, Little-endian memory.
Blocking
             Describes an operation that does not permit following instructions to be executed before the operation completes.
             A non-blocking operation can permit following instructions to be executed before the operation completes, and in
             the event of encountering an exception does not signal an exception to the PE. This enables implementations to
             retire following instructions while the non-blocking operation is executing, without the need to retain precise PE
             state.
Branch prediction
             Is where a PE selects a future execution path to fetch along. For example, after a branch instruction, the PE can
             choose to speculatively fetch either the instruction following the branch or the instruction at the branch target.
             See also Prefetching.
Breakpoint
             A debug event that is triggered by the execution of a particular instruction, which is specified by one or both of the
             address of the instruction and the state of the PE when the instruction is executed.
BTI

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2124
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
               Branch Target Identification. The mechanism used for creating and identifying valid branch landing pads.
BTI clearing
               Branch Target Identification clearing instruction. Any instruction that clears the EPSR.B bit to zero.
BTI setting
               Branch Target Identification setting instruction. Any instruction that sets the EPSR.B bit to one.
Byte
               An 8-bit data item.
Cache associativity
               The number of locations in a cache set to which an address can be assigned. Each location is identified by its way
               value.
Cache level
               The position of a cache in the cache hierarchy. In the Arm architecture, the lower numbered levels are those closest
               to the PE. For more information, see B7.19 Caches.
Cache line
               The basic unit of storage in a cache. Its size in words is always a power of two, usually four or eight words. A
               cache line must be aligned to a suitable memory boundary. A memory cache line is a block of memory locations
               with the same size and alignment as a cache line. Memory cache lines are sometimes loosely called cache lines.
Cache sets
               Areas of a cache, which is divided up to simplify and speed up the process of determining whether a cache hit
               occurs. The number of cache sets is always a power of two. The term cache sets is a common convention for
               describing cache memories, and this description must not be treated as defining a property of the cache.
Cache way
               A cache way consists of one cache line from each cache set. The cache ways are indexed from 0 to (Associativity-1).
               Each cache line in a cache way is chosen to have the same index as the cache way. For example, cache way n
               consists of the cache line with index n from each cache set. The term cache way is a common convention for
               describing cache memories, and this description must not be treated as defining a property of the cache.
Cache write-back granule
               The maximum size of the memory that can be overwritten. In some implementations, the CTR identifies the Cache
               Write-Back Granule.
Catastrophic failure
               A failure with harmful consequences that are orders of magnitude, or even incommensurably, higher than the
               benefit provided by correct service delivery.
Chained vector instruction
               An instruction that is subject to beat-wise execution.
Coherence order
               See Coherent
Coherent
               Data accesses from a set of observers to a byte in memory are coherent if accesses to that byte in memory by the
               members of that set of observers are consistent with there being a single total order of all writes to that byte in
               memory by all members of the set of observers. This single total order of all to writes to that memory location is
               the coherence order for that byte in memory.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2125
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Completer
              An agent in a computing system that responds to and completes a memory transaction that was initiated by a
              Requester.
              See also Requester
Condition code check
              The process of determining whether a conditional instruction executes normally or is treated as a NOP. For an
              instruction that includes a condition code field, that field is compared with the condition flags to determine whether
              the instruction is executed normally. For a T32 instruction in an IT block, the value of EPSR.IT determines whether
              the instruction is executed normally.
              See also Condition code field, Condition flags, Conditional execution.
Condition code field
              A 4-bit field in an instruction that specifies the condition under which the instruction executes.
              See also Condition code check.
Condition flags
              The N, Z, C, and V bits of APSR, or XPSR. See B3.5 XPSR, APSR, IPSR, and EPSR for more information.
              See also Condition code check.
Conditional execution
              When a conditional instruction starts executing, if the condition code check returns TRUE, the instruction executes
              normally. Otherwise, it is treated as a NOP. See C1.3 Conditional execution.
              See also Condition code check.
Configuration
              Settings that are made on reset, or immediately after reset, and normally expected to remain static throughout
              program execution.
CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE
              Where an instruction can result in UNPREDICTABLE behavior, the Armv8 architecture specifies a narrow range of
              permitted behaviors. This range is the range of CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior. All implementations
              that are compliant with the architecture must follow the CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE behavior within the
              limits defined for each particular case, and this behavior might vary.
              In body text, the term CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE is shown in SMALLCAPS.
              See also UNPREDICTABLE.
Containable
              An error that is not uncontained. A Containable error is also referred to as a Contained error.
Context switch
              The saving and restoring of computational state when switching between different threads or processes. In this
              manual, the term context switch describes any situation where the context is switched by an operating system and
              might or might not include changes to the address space.
Context synchronization event
              A Context synchronization event guarantees visibility of any change to any register described in the architecture.
              Following a Context synchronization event a completed write to a register is visible to an indirect read by an
              instruction appearing in program order after the context synchronization event.
Control dependency

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2126
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
             A control dependency exists when the data value that is returned by a read access determines the condition flags,
             and the values of the flags determine the address of a subsequent read access. This address determination might be
             through conditional execution, or through the evaluation of a branch.
Corrected
             An error that is detected by hardware and that hardware can correct. This is also referred to as a Correctable error.
Countable error
             An error that is detected and recorded by hardware by incrementing a counter.
Cross beat
             An operation that requires operands from different beats to produce the output for a single beat. For example, a
             vector widening operation would be cross beat, whereas a vector addition would not be.
Cross Trigger Interface
             A debug component that is not part of the Armv8-M architecture.
CTI
             See Cross Trigger Interface.
DAP
             Debug Access Port.
Data independent timing
             The time that it takes to execute a piece of code where the time is not a function of the data being operated on.
             See also B3.34 Data independent timing.
Data Watchpoint and Trace (DWT)
             The Data Watchpoint and Trace unit is a component of Armv8-M debug that optionally provides a number of trace,
             sampling, and profiling functions.
             See also B14.2 Data Watchpoint and Trace unit.
DCB
             See Debug Control Block.
Debug Control Block (DCB)
             A region in the System Control Space that is assigned to registers that support debug features.
             See also System Control Space.
Debugger
             In most of this manual, debugger refers to any agent that is performing debug. However, some parts of the manual
             require a more rigorous definition, and define debugger locally. See Chapter B13 Debug.
Deferred
             An error that has not been silently propagated but does not require immediate action at the producer. The error
             might have passed from the producer to the consumer.
Deprecated
             Something that is present in the Arm architecture for backwards compatibility. Whenever possible software
             must avoid using deprecated features. Features that are deprecated but are not optional are present in current
             implementations of the Arm architecture, but might not be present, or might be deprecated and OPTIONAL, in
             future versions of the Arm architecture.
             See also OPTIONAL.

DDI0553B.y                  Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2127
ID09082024                                            Non-confidential
Detected
             An error that has been detected and signaled to a consumer.
Detected Uncorrectable
             A detected error that cannot be corrected and causes failure.
Digital signal processing (DSP)
             Algorithms for processing signals that have been sampled and converted to digital form. DSP algorithms often use
             saturated arithmetic.
Direct access
             A read or write of a register.
DIT
             See Data independent timing.
Domain
             In the Arm architecture, domain is used in the following contexts.
             Shareability domain Defines a set of observers for which the Shareability attributes make the data or unified
                 caches transparent for data accesses.
             Power domain Defines a block of logic with a single, common, power supply.
Double-precision value
             Consists of two consecutive 32-bit words that are interpreted as a basic double-precision floating-point number
             according to the IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic.
Doubleword
             A 64-bit data item. Doublewords are normally at least word-aligned in Arm systems.
Doubleword-aligned
             Means that the address is divisible by 8.
DSP
             See Digital signal processing.
DWT
             See Data Watchpoint and Trace.
ECC
             Error Correction Code
EDC
             Error Detection Code
Effective Value
             A register control field, meaning a field in a register that controls some aspect of the behavior, can be described as
             having an Effective value:
                  • In some cases, the description of a particular control a specifies that when control a is active it causes a register
                    control field b to be treated as having a fixed value for all purposes other than direct reads, or direct reads and
                    direct writes, of the register containing control field b. When control a is active that fixed value is described as
                    the Effective value of register control field b.

DDI0553B.y                     Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                         2128
ID09082024                                               Non-confidential
                   In other cases, a register control field b is not implemented or is not accessible, but behavior of the PE is as
                   if control field b was implemented and accessible, and had a particular value. In this case, that value is the
                   Effective value of register control field b.
                   Where a register control field is introduced in a particular version of the architecture, and is not implemented
                   in an earlier version of the architecture, typically it will have an Effective value in that earlier version of the
                   architecture.
                 • Otherwise, the Effective value of a register control field is the value of that field.
Element
               The data that is put into a lane.
               See also Lane.
Embedded Trace Macrocell (ETM)
               A component of the Arm CoreSight debug and trace solution. An ETM provides non-invasive trace of PE operation.
               See B14.3 Embedded Trace Macrocell.
Endianness
               An aspect of the system memory mapping. For more information, see B7.5 Endianness.
               See also Big-endian memory and Little-endian memory.
EPSR
               See Execution Program Status Register.
Error
               Deviation from correct service or a correct value.
Error propagation
               Passing an error from a producer to a consumer.
Error record
               Data recorded about an error, usually by hardware.
ETM
               See Embedded Trace Macrocell
Exception
               Handles an event. For example, an exception could handle an external interrupt or an undefined instruction.
Exception vector
               A fixed address that contains the address of the first instruction of the corresponding exception handler.
Exception-continuable instruction
               Any instruction that can cause the PE to set the EPSR.ECI fields.
Execution Program Status Register (EPSR)
               A register that contains the Execution state bits and is part of the XPSR.
               See also B3.5 XPSR, APSR, IPSR, and EPSR.
Execution stream
               The stream of instructions that would have been executed by sequential execution of the program.
Explicit access

DDI0553B.y                      Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2129
ID09082024                                                Non-confidential
             A read from, or a write to memory or memory-mapped registers, generated by a load or store instruction that is
             executed by the PE or an access by the debugger.
Failure
             The event of deviation from correct service.
Fault
             An exception that is generated because of some form of system error. A BusFault might be a RAS fault.
Fault injection
             The deliberate injection of faults into a system for testing.
Fault prevention
             Designing a system to avoid faults.
Fault removal
             Logic or other mechanisms for detecting faults and correcting or bypassing their effect.
Field Replaceable Unit
             The smallest unit that can be replaced without return to base.
Flash Patch and Breakpoint Unit
             The Flash Patch and Breakpoint unit supports setting breakpoints on instruction fetches.
             See also B14.5 Flash Patch and Breakpoint unit.
Floating-point context
             The Floating-point context is as follows:
                  • S0-S15.
                  • FPSCR.
                  • VPR.
             See also:Additional floating-point state context.
Flush-to-zero mode
             A processing mode that optimizes the performance of some floating-point algorithms by replacing the denormalized
             operands and Intermediate results with zeros, without significantly affecting the accuracy of their final results.
FPB
             See Flash Patch and Breakpoint Unit.
FRU
             See Field Replaceable Unit.
General-purpose registers
             The registers that the base instructions use for processing:
                  • The general-purpose registers are R0-R12. R13-R14 are the SP and LR, respectively. For more information,
                    see B3.3 Registers.
             See also High registers, Low registers.
Halfword
             A 16-bit data item. Halfwords are normally halfword-aligned in Arm systems.
Halfword-aligned

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                 2130
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
             Means that the address is divisible by 2.
Hardware fault
             A fault that originates in or affects hardware.
High registers
             The general-purpose registers R8-R14. Most 16-bit T32 instructions cannot access the high registers.
                   Note
                   In some contexts, high registers refers to R8-R15, meaning R8-R14 and the PC.
             See also General-purpose registers, Low registers.
ICI
             See Interrupt-continuable instruction.
If-Then block (IT block)
             An IT block is a block of up to four instructions following an If-Then (IT) instruction. Each instruction in the block
             is conditional. The conditions for the instructions are either all the same, or some are the inverse of others.
Immediate and offset fields
             Are unsigned unless otherwise stated.
Immediate value
             A value that is encoded directly in the instruction and used as numeric data when the instruction is executed. Many
             T32 instructions can be used with an immediate argument.
IMP DEF
             An abbreviation that is used in diagrams to indicate that one or more bits have IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
             behavior.
IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED
             Means that the behavior is not architecturally defined, but must be defined and documented by individual
             implementations.
             In body text, the term IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED is shown in SMALLCAPS.
Implicit access
             An access that is not an explicit access. For example:
                 • Instruction fetches.
                 • The setting of a syndrome flag in response to an exception being raised.
             See also Explicit access.
Imprecise exception
             An exception that is generated as the result of a system error. An imprecise exception is reported at the time that is
             asynchronous to the instruction that caused it.
Index register
             A register that is specified in some load and store instructions. The value of this register is used as an offset to be
             added to or subtracted from the base register value to form the address that is sent to memory. Some instruction
             forms permit the index register value to be shifted before the addition or subtraction.
Indirect access

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2131
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
               A read or write of a register that is not a direct access.
               For example, an indirect write to a register might occur as the side effect of executing an instruction that does not
               perform a direct write to the register, or because of some operation that is performed by an external agent.
              See also Direct access
Infected
               Being in error.
Inline literals
               These are constant addresses and other data items that are held in the same area as the software itself. They are
               automatically generated by compilers, and can also appear in assembler code.
Instrumentation Trace Macrocell (ITM)
               A component of the Arm CoreSight debug and trace solution. An ITM provides a memory-mapped register
               interface that applications can use to write logging or event words to a trace sink.
              See B14.1 Instrumentation Trace Macrocell.
Interrupt Program Status Register (IPSR)
               The register that provides status information on whether an application thread or exception handler is executing on
               the processor. If an exception handler is executing, the register provides information on the exception type. The
               register is part of the XPSR.
              See also B3.5 XPSR, APSR, IPSR, and EPSR.
Interrupt Service Routine
               The procedure that handles an interrupt.
Interrupt-continuable instruction
               Multicycle load or store instructions that can be interrupted part way through their execution. After the interrupt
               service routine has completed, execution of the partially executed instruction can be resumed and the instruction
               is not required to be restarted from the beginning. An interruption of a multicycle load or store instructions will
               cause the PE to set the EPSR.ICI fields.
              See also Exception-continuable instruction
Interworking
              A method of working that permits branches between software using the A32 and T32 instruction sets in the
              Armv8-A architecture. For Armv8-M, interworking is described in C1.4.7 Instruction set, interworking and
              interstating support.
IPSR
               See Interrupt Program Status Register.
Isolation
               Limiting the impact of an error only to components that actually try to use corrupted data.
ISR
               See Interrupt Service Routine.
ITM
               See Instrumentation Trace Macrocell.
Landing pad

DDI0553B.y                       Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                   2132
ID09082024                                                 Non-confidential
               BTI landing pad instruction. A landing pad instruction is a BTI clearing instruction.
               Not all operations that clear the EPSR.B bit to zero are landing pads. For example, the EPSR.B is cleared
               automatically on exception entry but this operations is not a landing pad or a BTI clearing instruction.
               The following instructions are valid BTI landing pads:
                 • BTI.
                 • SG.
                 • PACBTI.
Lane
               A section of a vector register or operation.
Latent fault
               An error that is present in a system but not yet detected.
Level
               See Cache level.
Level of Coherence (LoC)
               The last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of coherency.
               See also Cache level, Point of Coherency.
Level of Unification, Inner Shareable (LoUIS)
               The last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of unification
               for the Inner Shareable Shareability domain.
               See also Cache level, Point of Unification.
Level of Unification, uniprocessor (LoUU)
               For a PE, the last level of cache that must be cleaned or invalidated when cleaning or invalidating to the point of
               unification for that PE.
               See also Cache level, Point of Unification.
Line
               See Cache line.
Little-endian memory
               Means that, for example:
                 • A byte or halfword at a word-aligned address is the least significant byte or halfword in the word at that
                   address.
                 • A byte at a halfword-aligned address is the least significant byte in the halfword at that address.
               See also Big-endian memory, B7.5 Endianness.
Load/store architecture
               An architecture where data-processing operations only operate on register contents, not directly on memory
               contents.
LoC
               See Level of Coherence.
Lockup

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2133
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
              A PE state where the PE stops executing instructions in response to an error for which escalation to an appropriate
              HardFault handler is not possible because of the current execution priority. For more information, see B3.33
              Lockup.
LoUIS
              See Level of Unification, Inner Shareable.
LoUU
              See Level of Unification, uniprocessor.
Low registers
              General-purpose registers R0-R7. Unlike the high registers, all T32 instructions can access the Low registers.
LR hazard
              An LR hazard occurs when LR is written while another instruction, other than LE or LETP, is accessing LR.
M-Profile Vector Extension
              An optional part of the Armv8.1-M architecture that supports both integer and floating-point data types.
Memory barriers
             The term memory barrier is the general term that is applied to an instruction, or sequence of instructions, that
             forces synchronization events by a PE regarding retiring Load/Store instructions. For more information, see B7.2.9
             Memory barriers.
Memory coherency
              The problem of ensuring that when a memory location is read, either by a data read or an instruction fetch, the
              value that is actually obtained is always the value that was most recently written to the location. This can be
              difficult when there are multiple possible physical locations, such as main memory and at least one of a write
              buffer and one or more levels of cache.
Memory hint
             A memory hint instruction provides advance information to memory systems about future memory accesses,
             without actually loading or storing any data to or from the register file. PLD and PLI are the only memory hint
             instructions that are defined in Armv8-M.
Memory Protection Unit (MPU)
              A hardware unit whose registers provide simple control of a limited number of protection regions in memory, for
              more information, see Chapter B10 The Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture.
Minor failure
              A failure with harmful consequences that are of a similar cost to the benefits that are provided by correct service
              delivery.
MPU
              See Chapter B10 The Armv8-M Protected Memory System Architecture.
Multi-copy atomicity
              The form of atomicity that is described in B7.2.2 Multi-copy atomicity.
              See also Atomicity, Single-copy atomicity.
MVE
              See M-Profile Vector Extension.
NaN

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    2134
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
             Not a Number. A floating-point value that can be used when neither a numeric value nor an infinity is appropriate.
             A NaN can be a quiet NaN, that propagate through most floating-point operations, or a signaling NaN, that
             causes an Invalid Operation floating-point exception when used. For more information, see the IEEE Standard for
             Floating-point Arithmetic.
Node
             A component that detects an error is called a node.
Non-Return-to-Zero (NRZ)
             A physical layer signaling scheme that is used on asynchronous communication ports
NRZ
             See Non-Return-to-Zero.
Obsolete
             Obsolete indicates something that is no longer supported by Arm. When an architectural feature is described
             as obsolete, this indicates that the architecture has no support for that feature, although an earlier version of the
             architecture did support it.
Offset addressing
             Means that the memory address is formed by adding or subtracting an offset to or from the base register value.
OPTIONAL
             When applied to a feature of the architecture, OPTIONAL indicates a feature that is not required in an implementation
             of the Arm architecture:
               • If a feature is OPTIONAL and deprecated, this indicates that the feature is being phased out of the
                 architecture. Arm expects such a feature to be included in a new implementation only if there is a known
                 backwards-compatibility reason for the inclusion of the feature.
                   A feature that is OPTIONAL and deprecated might not be present in future versions of the architecture.
               • A feature that is OPTIONAL but not deprecated is, typically, a feature added to a version of the Arm architecture
                 after the initial release of that version of the architecture. Arm recommends that such features are included in
                 all new implementations of the architecture.
             In body text, these meanings of the term OPTIONAL are shown in SMALLCAPS.
             Note: Do not confuse these Arm-specific uses of OPTIONAL with other uses of OPTIONAL, where it has its usual
             meaning. These include:
               • Optional arguments in the syntax of many instructions.
               • Behavior that is determined by an implementation choice.
             See also Deprecated.
PAC
             Pointer Authentication Code. The hash generated by the cryptographic algorithm. PAC also refers to the process
             used for generating the hash.
PE
             See Processing element.
Performance Monitoring Unit
             An optional non-invasive debug component that allows events to be identified and counted. See Chapter B15 The
             Performance Monitors Extension
Persistent fault

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                     2135
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
              A fault that is not transient.
Physical address (PA)
              An address that identifies a location in the physical memory map.
PMU
              See Performing Monitoring Unit.
PoC
              See Point of Coherency.
Point of coherency (PoC)
              For a particular PA, the point at which all agents that can access memory are guaranteed to see the same copy of a
              memory location.
Point of unification (PoU)
              For a particular PE, the point by which the instruction and data caches of that PE are guaranteed to see the same
              copy of a memory location.
Poisoned
              State that has been marked as being in error so that subsequent consumption of the state signals a detected error to
              a consumer.
Post-indexed addressing
              Means that the memory address is the base register value, but an offset is added to or subtracted from the base
              register value and the result is written back to the base register.
PoU
              See Point of Unification.
PPB
              Private Peripheral Bus
Pre-indexed addressing
              Means that the memory address is formed in the same way as for offset addressing, but the memory address is also
              written back to the base register.
Precise exception
              An exception is described as precise when the exception handler receives the PE state and memory system state
              that is consistent with the PE having executed all instructions up to, but not including, the point in the instruction
              stream where the exception was taken and none afterwards.
Prefetching
              Prefetching refers to speculatively fetching instructions or data from the memory system. In particular, instruction
              prefetching is the process of fetching instructions from memory before the instructions that precede them, in simple
              sequential execution of the program, have finished executing. Prefetching an instruction does not mean that the
              instruction has to be executed.
              In this manual, references to instruction or data fetching apply also to prefetching, unless the context explicitly
              indicates otherwise.
              See also Simple sequential execution.
Privileged access
              Memory systems typically differentiate between privileged and unprivileged accesses, and support more restrictive
              permissions for unprivileged accesses. Some instructions can be used only by privileged software.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2136
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Processing element (PE)
             The abstract machine that is defined in the Arm architecture, as documented in an Arm Architecture Reference
             Manual. A PE implementation compliant with the Arm architecture must conform with the behaviors described in
             the corresponding Arm Architecture Reference Manual.
Program Status Registers (XPSR)
             XPSR is the term that is used to describe the combination of the APSR, EPSR, and IPSR into a single 32-bit
             Program Status Register.
             See also B3.5 XPSR, APSR, IPSR, and EPSR.
Protection granule
             A quantum of memory for which an EDC or ECC provides detection or correction.
Protection region
             A memory region whose position, size, and other properties are defined by Memory Protection Unit registers.
Protection Unit
             See Memory Protection Unit
Pseudo-instruction
             UAL assembler syntax that assembles to an instruction encoding that is expected to disassemble to a different
             assembler syntax, and is described in this manual under that other syntax. For example, MOV<Rd>, <Rm>, LSL #<n>
             is a pseudo-instruction that is expected to disassemble as LSL<Rd>, <Rm>, #<n>.
             See also Chapter C1 Instruction Set Overview.
Quadword
             A 128-bit data item. Quadwords are normally at least word-aligned in Arm systems.
Quadword-aligned
             Means that the address is divisible by 16.
Quiet NaN
             A NaN that propagates unchanged through most floating-point operations.
RAO
             See Read-As-One.
RAO/SBOP
             In versions of the Arm architecture before Armv8, Read-As-One, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved on writes.
             In Armv8, RES 1 replaces this description.
             See also UNK / SBOP, Read-As-One, RES 1, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP).
RAO/WI
             Read-As-One, Writes Ignored.
             Hardware must implement the field as Read-As-One, and must ignore writes to the field.
             Software can rely on the field reading as all 1s, and on writes being ignored.
             This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 1, or to a field that reads as all 1s.
             See also Read-As-One.
RAS

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.               2137
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
              Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability. See Chapter B16 Reliability, Availability, and Serviceability (RAS)
              Extension
RAZ
              See Read-As-Zero.
RAZ/SBZP
              In versions of the Arm architecture before Armv8, Read-As-Zero, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved on writes.
              In Armv8, RES 0 replaces this description.
              See also UNK / SBZP, Read-As-Zero, RES 0, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBOP).
RAZ/WI
              Read-As-Zero, Writes Ignored.
              Hardware must implement the field as Read-As-Zero, and must ignore writes to the field.
              Software can rely on the field reading as all 0s, and on writes being ignored.
              This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 0, or to a field that reads as all 0s.
              See also Read-As-Zero.
Read, modify, write
              In a read, modify, write instruction sequence, a value is read to a general-purpose register, the relevant fields that
              are updated in that register, and the new value that is written back.
Read-allocate cache
              A cache in which a cache miss on reading data causes a cache line to be allocated into the cache.
Read-As-One (RAO)
              Hardware must implement the field as reading as all 1s.
              Software:
                • Can rely on the field reading as all 1s.
                • Must use a SBOP policy to write to the field.
              This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 1, or to a field that reads as all 1s. It applies only to a bit or
              field that is read-only.
              See also RAO/SBOP, RAO/WI, RES 1.
Read-As-Zero (RAZ)
              Hardware must implement the field as reading as all 0s.
              Software:
                • Can rely on the field reading as all 0s
                • Must use a SBZP policy to write to the field.
              This description can apply to a single bit that reads as 0, or to a field that reads as all 0s. It applies only to a bit or
              field that is read-only.
              See also RAZ/SBZP, RAZ/WI, RES 0.
Recoverable
              A contained error that must be corrected to allow the correct operation of the system or smaller parts of the system
              to continue.
              See also B16.3 Generating error exceptions.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          2138
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
Register data dependency
              A register data dependency exists between a first data value and a second data value when either:
                • The register that holds the first data value is used in the calculation of the second data value, and the calculation
                  between the first data value and the second data value does not consist of either:
                   – A conditional branch whose condition is determined by the first data value.
                   – A conditional selection, move, or computation whose condition is determined by the first data value,
                      where the input data values for the selection, move, or computation do not have a data dependency on the
                      first data value.
                • There is a register data dependency between the first data value and a third data value, and between the third
                  data value and the second data value.
              See B7.2.3 Ordering and observability
Reliability
              Continuity of correct service.
Requester
              An agent in a computing system that is capable of initiating memory transactions.
              See also Completer
RES0
              A reserved bit or field with Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved behavior, or equivalent read-only or write-only behavior.
              Used for fields in register descriptions, and for fields in architecturally defined data structures that are held in
              memory.
              Within the architecture, there are some cases where a register bit or field:
                • Is RES 0 in some defined architectural context.
                • Has different defined behavior in a different architectural context.
                   Note
                   RES 0 is not used in descriptions of instruction encodings.

              This means the definition of RES 0 for fields in read/write registers is:
              If a bit is RES 0 in all contexts
              For a bit in a read/write register, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
               1. The bit is hardwired to 0. In this case:
                     • Reads of the bit always return 0.
                     • Writes to the bit are ignored.
               2. The bit can be written. In this case:
                     • An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 0.
                     • A read of the bit returns the last value that is successfully written, by either a direct or an indirect write, to
                       the bit.

                       If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset value if
                       there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
                     • A direct write to the bit must update a storage location that is associated with the bit.
                     • The value of the bit must have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read
                       back from the bit, unless this manual explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          2139
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
             Whether RES 0 bits or fields follow behavior 1 or behavior 2 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED on a bit-by-bit basis.
             If a bit is RES 0 only in some contexts
             For a bit in a read/write register, when the bit is described as RES 0:
               • An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 0.
               • A read of the bit must return the value last successfully written to the bit, by either a direct or an indirect
                 write, regardless of the use of the register when the bit was written.

                  If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset value if there is
                  one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
               • A direct write to the bit must update a storage location that is associated with the bit.
               • While the use of the register is such that the bit is described as RES 0, the value of the bit must have no effect
                 on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read back from that bit, unless this manual
                 explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.
             Considering only contexts that apply to a particular implementation, if there is a context in which a bit is defined
             as RES 0, another context in which the same bit is defined as RES 1, and no context in which the bit is defined as a
             functional bit, then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
               • Writes to the bit are ignored, and reads of the bit return an UNKNOWN value.
               • The value of the bit can be written, and a read returns the last value that is written to the bit.
             The RES 0 description can apply to bits or fields that are read-only, or are write-only:
               • For a read-only bit, RES 0 indicates that the bit reads as 0, but software must treat the bit as UNKNOWN.
               • For a write-only bit, RES 0 indicates that software must treat the bit as SBZ.
             A bit that is RES 0 in a context is reserved for possible future use in that context. To preserve forward compatibility,
             software:
               • Must not rely on the bit reading as 0.
               • Must use an SBZP policy to write to the bit.
             This RES 0 description can apply to a single bit, or to a field for which each bit of the field must be treated as RES 0.
             In body text, the term RES 0 is shown in SMALLCAPS.
             See also Read-As-Zero, RES 1, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved, UNKNOWN.
RES0H
             A reserved bit or field with Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP). This behavior uses the Hardwired to 0 subset of
             the RES 0 definition.
RES1
             A reserved bit or field with Should-Be-One-or-Preserved behavior, or equivalent read-only or write-only behavior.
             Used for fields in register descriptions, and for fields in architecturally defined data structures that are held in
             memory.
             Within the architecture, there are some cases where a register bit or field:
               • Is RES 1 in some defined architectural context.
               • Has different defined behavior in a different architectural context.
                  Note
                  RES 1 is not used in descriptions of instruction encodings.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          2140
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
             This means the definition of RES 1 for fields in read/write registers is:
             If a bit is RES 1 in all contexts
             For a bit in a read/write register, it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
              1. The bit is hardwired to 1. In this case:
                    • Reads of the bit always return 1.
                    • Writes to the bit are ignored.
              2. The bit can be written. In this case:
                    • An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 1.
                    • A read of the bit returns the last value that is successfully written, by either a direct or an indirect write, to
                      the bit.

                      If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset value if
                      there is one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
                    • A direct write to the bit must update a storage location that is associated with the bit.
                    • The value of the bit must have no effect on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read
                      back from the bit, unless this manual explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.
             Whether RES 1 bits or fields follow behavior 1 or behavior 2 is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED on a bit-by-bit basis.
             If a bit is RES 1 only in some contexts
             For a bit in a read/write register, when the bit is described as RES 1:
               • An indirect write to the register sets the bit to 1.
               • A read of the bit must return the value last successfully written to the bit, regardless of the use of the register
                 when the bit was written.
                      Note
                      As indicated in this list, this value might be written by an indirect write to the register.

                  If the bit has not been successfully written since reset, then the read of the bit returns the reset value if there is
                  one, or otherwise returns an UNKNOWN value.
               • A direct write to the bit must update a storage location that is associated with the bit.
               • While the use of the register is such that the bit is described as RES 1, the value of the bit must have no effect
                 on the operation of the PE, other than determining the value read back from that bit, unless this manual
                 explicitly defines additional properties for the bit.

             Considering only contexts that apply to a particular implementation, if there is a context in which a bit is defined
             as RES 0, another context in which the same bit is defined as RES 1, and no context in which the bit is defined as a
             functional bit, then it is IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED whether:
               • Writes to the bit are ignored, and reads of the bit return an UNKNOWN value.
               • The value of the bit can be written, and a read returns the last value that is written to the bit.
             The RES 1 description can apply to bits or fields that are read-only, or are write-only:
               • For a read-only bit, RES 1 indicates that the bit reads as 1, but software must treat the bit as UNKNOWN.
               • For a write-only bit, RES 1 indicates that software must treat the bit as SBO.
             A bit that is RES 1 in a context is reserved for possible future use in that context. To preserve forward compatibility,
             software:

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                          2141
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
                • Must not rely on the bit reading as 1.
                • Must use an SBOP policy to write to the bit.
              This RES 1 description can apply to a single bit, or to a field for which each bit of the field must be treated as RES 1.
              In body text, the term RES 1 is shown in SMALLCAPS.
              See also Read-As-One, RES 0, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved, UNKNOWN.
RES1H
              A reserved bit or field with Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP) behavior. This behavior uses the Hardwired to 1
              subset of the RES 1 definition.
Reserved
              Unless otherwise stated:
                • Instructions that are reserved or that access reserved registers have UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED
                  UNPREDICTABLE behavior.

                • Bit positions that are described as reserved are:
                    – In an RW or WO register, RES 0.
                    – In an RO register, UNK.
              See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, RES 0, RES 1, UNDEFINED, UNK, UNPREDICTABLE.
Restartable
              A contained error that does not immediately impact correct operation. Usually this means correct operation of the
              system, but it can also be used in other contexts to describe correct operation of a smaller part.
              See also B16.3 Generating error exceptions.
Return Link
              A value relating to the return address.
RISC
              Reduced Instruction Set Computer.
Rounding error
              The value of the rounded result of an arithmetic operation minus the exact result of the operation.
Rounding mode
              Specifies how the exact result of a floating-point operation is rounded to a value that is representable in the
              destination format. The rounding modes are defined by the IEEE Standard for Floating-point Arithmetic.
Saturated arithmetic
              Integer arithmetic in which a result that would be greater than the largest representable number is set to the largest
              representable number, and a result that would be less than the smallest representable number is set to the smallest
              representable number. Signed saturated arithmetic is often used in DSP algorithms. It contrasts with the normal
              signed integer arithmetic used in Arm processors, in which overflowing results wrap around from +231 − 1 to
              −231 or the opposite way.
SBO
              See Should-Be-One.
SBOP
              See Should-Be-One-or-Preserved.
SBZ

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        2142
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
             See Should-Be-Zero.
SBZP
             See Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved
Security hole
             A mechanism by which execution at the current level of privilege can achieve an outcome that cannot be achieved at
             the current or a lower level of privilege using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE and are not CONSTRAINED
             UNPREDICTABLE . The Arm architecture forbids security holes.

             See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.
Self-modifying code
             Code that writes one or more instructions to memory and then executes them. When using self-modifying code,
             cache maintenance and barrier instructions must be used to ensure synchronization.
Serial Wire Output (SWO)
             An asynchronous TPIU port supporting one or both of the NRZ and Manchester encodings.
Serial Wire Viewer (SWV)
             The combination of an SWO and at least one of a DWT unit or an ITM, providing data tracing capability.
Service failure mode
             A mode entered to reduce the severity of an error.
Serviceability
             The ability to undergo modification and repairs.
Set
             See Cache sets.
Should-Be-One (SBO)
             Hardware must ignore writes to the field.
             Arm strongly recommends that software writes the field as all 1s. If software writes a value that is not all 1s, it
             must expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as 1, or to a field that should be written as all 1s.
             See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.
Should-Be-One-or-Preserved (SBOP)
             From the introduction of the Armv8 architecture, the description Should-Be-One-0r -Preserved is superseded by
             RES 1.

             Hardware must ignore writes to the field.
             If software has read the field since the PE implementing the field was last reset and initialized, it must preserve the
             value of the field by writing the value that it previously read from the field. Otherwise, it must write the field as all
             1s.
             If software writes a value to the field that is not a value that is previously read for the field and is not all 1s, it must
             expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 1, or to a field that
             should be written as its preserved value or as all 1s.
             See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.
Should-Be-Zero (SBZ)

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           2143
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
             Hardware must ignore writes to the field.
             Arm strongly recommends that software writes the field as all 0s. If software writes a value that is not all 0s, it
             must expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as 0, or to a field that should be written as all 0s.
             See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.
Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved (SBZP)
             From the introduction of the Armv8 architecture, the description Should-Be-Zero -or-Preserved is superseded by
             RES 0.

             Hardware must ignore writes to the field.
             If software has read the field since the PE implementing the field was last reset and initialized, it must preserve the
             value of the field by writing the value that it previously read from the field. Otherwise, it must write the field as all
             0s.
             If software writes a value to the field that is not a value that is previously read for the field and is not all 0s, it must
             expect an UNPREDICTABLE or CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE result.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 0, or to a field that
             should be written as its preserved value or as all 0s.
             See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE.
Signaling NaNs
             Cause an Invalid Operation exception whenever any floating-point operation receives a signaling NaN as an
             operand. Signaling NaNs can be used in debugging, to track down some uses of uninitialized variables.
Signed data types
             Represent an integer in the range −2N −1 to +2N −1 − 1, using two’s complement format.
Signed immediate and offset fields
             Are encoded in two’s complement notation unless otherwise stated.
Silent data corruption
             An error that is not detected by hardware or software.
Silently propagated
             An error that is passed from place to place without being signaled as a detected error.
SIMD
             Single-Instruction, Multiple-Data.
Simple sequential execution
             The behavior of an implementation that fetches, decodes and completely executes each instruction before
             proceeding to the next instruction. Such an implementation performs no Speculative accesses to memory, including
             to instruction memory. The implementation does not pipeline any phase of execution. In practice, this is the
             theoretical execution model that the architecture is based on, and Arm does not expect this model to correspond to
             a realistic implementation of the architecture.
Single peripheral
             A single peripheral is a region of memory of an IMPLEMENTATION DEFINED size that is defined by the peripheral.
Single-copy atomicity

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                           2144
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
             The form of atomicity that is described in B7.2.1 Single-copy atomicity.
             See also Atomicity, Multi-copy atomicity.
Single-precision value
             A 32-bit word that is interpreted as a basic single-precision floating-point number according to the IEEE Standard
             for Floating-point Arithmetic.
Software fault
             A fault that originates in and affects software.
Spatial locality
             The observed effect that after a program has accessed a memory location, it is likely to also access nearby memory
             locations in the near future. Caches with multi-word cache lines exploit this effect to improve performance.
Special-purpose register
             One of a specified set of registers for which all direct and indirect reads and writes to the register appear to
             occur in program order relative to other instructions, without the need for any explicit synchronization. For more
             information, see B3.3 Registers.
Speculative writes
             All of the following are Speculative writes:
                   • Writes generated by store instructions that appear in the Execution stream after a branch that is not
                     architecturally resolved.
                   • Writes generated by store instructions that appear in the Execution stream after an instruction where a
                     synchronous exception condition has not been architecturally resolved.
                   • Writes generated by conditional store instructions for which the conditions for the instruction have not been
                     architecturally resolved.
                   • Writes generated by store instructions for which the data being written comes from a register that has not
                     been architecturally committed.
State context registers
             The State context registers are as follows:
                   • R0 to R3.
                   • R12.
                   • LR.
                   • RETPSR.
                   • The ReturnAddress.
             See also Additional state context registers
Synchronous exception
             An exception is described as synchronous if all of the following apply:
                   • The exception generated as a result of direct execution or attempted execution of the instruction stream.
                   • The return addess presented to the exception handler is guaranteed to indicate the instruction that caused the
                     exception.
                   • The exception is precise.
             See also Asynchronous exception, Precise exception.
System Control Block (SCB)
             An address region in the System Control Space, which is used for key feature control and configuration that is
             associated with the exception model.
             See also System Control Space.

DDI0553B.y                     Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    2145
ID09082024                                               Non-confidential
System Control Space (SCS)
              A region of the memory map that is reserved for system control and configuration registers.
              See also Debug Control Block, B8.3 The System Control Space (SCS).
T32 instruction
              One or two halfwords that specify an operation to be performed by a PE. T32 instructions must be halfword-aligned.
              For more information, see Chapter C1 Instruction Set Overview.
              T32 instructions were previously called Thumb instructions.
Tail-chaining
              An optimization that removes unstacking and stacking operations. For more information, see B3.26 Tail-chaining.
Temporal locality
              The observed effect that after a program has accesses a memory location, it is likely to access the same memory
              location again in the near future. Caches exploit this effect to improve performance.
TPIU
              See Trace Port Interface Unit.
Trace Port Interface Unit (TPIU)
              A component of the Arm CoreSight debug and trace solution. A TPIU provides an external interface for one or
              more trace sources in the processor implementation.
              See B14.4 Trace Port Interface Unit.
Transient fault
              A fault that is not persistent.
UAL
              See Unified Assembler Language.
Unaligned
              An unaligned access is an access where the address of the access is not aligned to the size of an element of the
              access.
Unaligned memory accesses
              Are memory accesses that are not, or might not be, appropriately halfword-aligned, word-aligned, or
              doubleword-aligned.
Unallocated
              Except where otherwise stated in this manual, an instruction encoding is unallocated if the architecture does not
              assign a specific function to the entire bit pattern of the instruction, but instead describes it as CONSTRAINED
              UNPREDICTABLE , UNDEFINED , UNPREDICTABLE, or as an unallocated hint instruction.

              A bit in a register is unallocated if the architecture does not assign a function to that bit.
              See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED.
Uncontainable
              An error that has been, or might have been, silently propagated. This is also referred to as an Uncontained error.
              See also B16.3 Generating error exceptions.
UNDEFINED

DDI0553B.y                    Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                  2146
ID09082024                                              Non-confidential
             Indicates an instruction that generates an Undefined Instruction exception.
             In body text, the term UNDEFINED is shown in SMALLCAPS.
             See also Chapter C1 Instruction Set Overview.
Undetected fault
             See Latent fault.
Unified Assembler Language
             The assembler language that is introduced with Thumb-2 technology that is used in this manual. See Chapter C1
             Instruction Set Overview for details.
Unified cache
             Is a cache that is used for both processing instruction fetches and processing data loads and stores.
Unindexed addressing
             Means addressing in which the base register value is used directly as the address to send to memory, without
             adding or subtracting an offset. In most types of load/store instruction, unindexed addressing is performed by
             using offset addressing with an immediate offset of 0.
             In the M-Profile, the LDC, LDC2, STC, and STC2 instructions have an explicit unindexed addressing mode that
             permits the offset field in the instruction to specify additional coprocessor options.
UNK
             An abbreviation indicating that software must treat a field as containing an UNKNOWN value.
             Hardware must implement the bit as read as 0, or all 0s for a multi-bit field. Software must not rely on the field
             reading as zero.
             See also UNKNOWN.
UNK/SBOP
             Hardware must implement the field as Read-As-One, and must ignore writes to the field.
             Software must not rely on the field reading as all 1s, and except for writing back to the register it must treat the
             value as if it is UNKNOWN. Software must use an SBOP policy to write to the field.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 1, or to a field that
             should be written as its preserved value or as all 1s.
             See also Read-as-One, Should-Be-One-or-Preserved, UNKNOWN.
UNK/SBZP
             Hardware must implement the bit as Read-As-Zero, and must ignore writes to the field.
             Software must not rely on the field reading as all 0s, and except for writing back to the register must treat the value
             as if it is UNKNOWN. Software must use an SBZP policy to write to the field.
             This description can apply to a single bit that should be written as its preserved value or as 0, or to a field that
             should be written as its preserved value or as all 0s.
             See also Read-as-Zero, Should-Be-Zero-or-Preserved, UNKNOWN.
UNKNOWN
             An UNKNOWN value does not contain valid data, and can vary from moment to moment, instruction to instruction,
             and implementation to implementation. An UNKNOWN value must not return information than cannot be accessed
             at the current or lower level of privilege using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE, is not CONSTRAINED
             UNPREDICTABLE , and do not return UNKNOWN values.

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                      2147
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
               An UNKNOWN value can vary from moment to moment, and instruction to instruction, unless it has previously
               been assigned, other than at reset, to one of the following registers:
                 • Any of the general-purpose registers.
                 • Any of the Advanced SIMD and floating-point registers.
                 • Any of the APSR.{N, Z, C, V} flags.
               An UNKNOWN value must not be documented or promoted as having a defined value or effect.
               In body text, the term UNKNOWN is shown in SMALLCAPS.
               See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED, UNK, UNPREDICTABLE.
UNPREDICTABLE
               Means the behavior cannot be relied on. UNPREDICTABLE behavior must not perform any function that cannot be
               performed at the current or a lower level of privilege or security using instructions that are not UNPREDICTABLE.
               UNPREDICTABLE behavior must not be documented or promoted as having a defined effect.

               An instruction that is UNPREDICTABLE can be implemented as UNDEFINED.
               In body text, the term UNPREDICTABLE is shown in SMALLCAPS.
               See also CONSTRAINED UNPREDICTABLE, UNDEFINED.
Unrecoverable
               A contained error that is not recoverable. Continued correct operation is generally not possible. Usually this means
               correct operation of the system, but it can also be used in other contexts to describe correct operation of a smaller
               part. Systems might use high-level recovery techniques to work around an unrecoverable yet contained error in a
               component so that the system recovers from the error.
               See also B16.3 Generating error exceptions.
Unsigned data types
               Represent a non-negative integer in the range 0 to +2N −1 − 1, using normal binary format.
Watchpoint
               A debug event that is triggered by an access to memory, which is specified in terms of the address of the location
               in memory being accessed.
Way
               See Cache way.
WI
               Writes Ignored. In a register that software can write to, a WI attribute that is applied to a bit or field indicates that
               the bit or field ignores the value that is written by software and retains the value it had before that write.
               See also RAO / WI, RAZ/WI, RES 0, RES 1.
Word
               A 32-bit data item. Words are normally word-aligned in Arm systems.
Word-aligned
               Means that the address is divisible by 4.
Write buffer
               A block of high-speed memory that optimizes stores to main memory.
Write-Allocate cache
               A cache in which a cache miss on storing data causes a cache line to be allocated into the cache.

DDI0553B.y                     Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                        2148
ID09082024                                               Non-confidential
Write-back cache
             A cache in which when a cache hit occurs on a store access, the data is only written to the cache. Data in the cache
             can therefore be more up-to-date than data in main memory. Any such data is written back to main memory when
             the cache line is cleaned or reallocated. Another common term for a write-back cache is a copy-back cache.
Write-one-to-clear
             Writing 1 to the relevant bit clears it to 0. Writing 0 to the bit has no effect.
Write-one-to-set
             Writing 1 to the relevant bit sets it to 1. Writing 0 to the bit has no effect.
Write-Through cache
             A cache in which when a cache hit occurs on a store access, the data is written both to the cache and to main
             memory. This is normally done using a write buffer, to avoid slowing down the PE.
XPSR
             See Program Status Registers (XPSR).

DDI0553B.y                   Copyright © 2015 - 2024 Arm Limited or its affiliates. All rights reserved.                    2149
ID09082024                                             Non-confidential
