Why This Book?

There are plenty of books that teach introductory data structures. Some
of them are very good. Most of them cost money, and the vast majority
of computer science undergraduate students will shell out at least some
cash on a data structures book.
    Several free data structures books are available online. Some are very
good, but most of them are getting old. The majority of these books be-
came free when their authors and/or publishers decided to stop updat-
ing them. Updating these books is usually not possible, for two reasons:
(1) The copyright belongs to the author and/or publisher, either of whom
may not allow it. (2) The source code for these books is often not avail-
able. That is, the Word, WordPerfect, FrameMaker, or LATEX source for
the book is not available, and even the version of the software that han-
dles this source may not be available.
    The goal of this project is to free undergraduate computer science stu-
dents from having to pay for an introductory data structures book. I have
decided to implement this goal by treating this book like an Open Source
software project. The LATEX source, pseudocode source, and build scripts
for the book are available to download from the author’s website1 and
also, more importantly, on a reliable source code management site.2
    The source code available there is released under a Creative Commons
Attribution license, meaning that anyone is free to share: to copy, dis-
tribute and transmit the work; and to remix: to adapt the work, including
the right to make commercial use of the work. The only condition on
these rights is attribution: you must acknowledge that the derived work
contains code and/or text from opendatastructures.org.
  1 http://opendatastructures.org
  2 https://github.com/patmorin/ods

                              Why This Book?

    Anyone can contribute corrections/fixes using the git source-code
management system. Anyone can also fork the book’s sources to develop
a separate version (for example, in another programming language). My
hope is that, by doing things this way, this book will continue to be a use-
ful textbook long after my interest in the project, or my pulse, (whichever
comes first) has waned.

