Chapter 3

Linked Lists

In this chapter, we continue to study implementations of the List inter-
face, this time using pointer-based data structures rather than arrays. The
structures in this chapter are made up of nodes that contain the list items.
Using references (pointers), the nodes are linked together into a sequence.
We first study singly-linked lists, which can implement Stack and (FIFO)
Queue operations in constant time per operation and then move on to
doubly-linked lists, which can implement Deque operations in constant
time.
    Linked lists have advantages and disadvantages when compared to
array-based implementations of the List interface. The primary disad-
vantage is that we lose the ability to access any element using get(i) or
set(i, x) in constant time. Instead, we have to walk through the list, one
element at a time, until we reach the ith element. The primary advantage
is that they are more dynamic: Given a reference to any list node u, we
can delete u or insert a node adjacent to u in constant time. This is true
no matter where u is in the list.

3.1   SLList: A Singly-Linked List

An SLList (singly-linked list) is a sequence of Nodes. Each node u stores
a data value u.x and a reference u.next to the next node in the sequence.
For the last node w in the sequence, w.next = nil
   For efficiency, an SLList uses variables head and tail to keep track of

§3.1                            Linked Lists

   head                                        tail
   a         b           c         d           e
   head                                                   tail   add(x)
   a         b           c         d           e         x
              head                                        tail   remove()
             b           c         d           e         x
                         head                             tail   pop()
                         c         d           e         x
              head                                        tail   push(y)
             y           c         d           e         x

Figure 3.1: A sequence of Queue (add(x) and remove()) and Stack (push(x) and
pop()) operations on an SLList.

the first and last node in the sequence, as well as an integer n to keep
track of the length of the sequence:

   initialize()
      n←0
      head ← nil
      tail ← nil

    A sequence of Stack and Queue operations on an SLList is illustrated
in Figure 3.1.
    An SLList can efficiently implement the Stack operations push() and
pop() by adding and removing elements at the head of the sequence. The
push() operation simply creates a new node u with data value x, sets
u.next to the old head of the list and makes u the new head of the list.
Finally, it increments n since the size of the SLList has increased by one:

   push(x)
     u ← new node(x)
     u.next ← head

                        SLList: A Singly-Linked List                  §3.1

        head ← u
        if n = 0 then
           tail ← u
        n ← n+1
        return x

    The pop() operation, after checking that the SLList is not empty, re-
moves the head by setting head ← head.next and decrementing n. A spe-
cial case occurs when the last element is being removed, in which case
tail is set to nil:

  pop()
    if n = 0 then return nil
    x ← head.x
    head ← head.next
    n ← n−1
    if n = 0 then
        tail ← nil
    return x

   Clearly, both the push(x) and pop() operations run in O(1) time.

3.1.1    Queue Operations

An SLList can also implement the FIFO queue operations add(x) and
remove() in constant time. Removals are done from the head of the list,
and are identical to the pop() operation:

  remove()
    return pop()

   Additions, on the other hand, are done at the tail of the list. In most
cases, this is done by setting tail.next = u, where u is the newly created
node that contains x. However, a special case occurs when n = 0, in which
case tail = head = nil. In this case, both tail and head are set to u.

§3.2                             Linked Lists

   add(x)
     u ← new node(x)
     if n = 0 then
        head ← u
     else
        tail.next ← u
     tail ← u
     n ← n+1
     return true

   Clearly, both add(x) and remove() take constant time.

3.1.2   Summary

The following theorem summarizes the performance of an SLList:

Theorem 3.1. An SLList implements the Stack and (FIFO) Queue interfaces.
The push(x), pop(), add(x) and remove() operations run in O(1) time per
operation.

    An SLList nearly implements the full set of Deque operations. The
only missing operation is removing from the tail of an SLList. Removing
from the tail of an SLList is difficult because it requires updating the value
of tail so that it points to the node w that precedes tail in the SLList; this
is the node w such that w.next = tail. Unfortunately, the only way to get
to w is by traversing the SLList starting at head and taking n − 2 steps.

3.2     DLList: A Doubly-Linked List

A DLList (doubly-linked list) is very similar to an SLList except that each
node u in a DLList has references to both the node u.next that follows it
and the node u.prev that precedes it.
   When implementing an SLList, we saw that there were always sev-
eral special cases to worry about. For example, removing the last element
from an SLList or adding an element to an empty SLList requires care to

                       DLList: A Doubly-Linked List                     §3.2

  dummy
                   a           b            c            d         e

Figure 3.2: A DLList containing a,b,c,d,e.

ensure that head and tail are correctly updated. In a DLList, the number
of these special cases increases considerably. Perhaps the cleanest way to
take care of all these special cases in a DLList is to introduce a dummy
node. This is a node that does not contain any data, but acts as a place-
holder so that there are no special nodes; every node has both a next and
a prev, with dummy acting as the node that follows the last node in the list
and that precedes the first node in the list. In this way, the nodes of the
list are (doubly-)linked into a cycle, as illustrated in Figure 3.2.

   initialize()
      n←0
      dummy ← DLList.Node(nil)
      dummy.prev ← dummy
      dummy.next ← dummy

    Finding the node with a particular index in a DLList is easy; we can
either start at the head of the list (dummy.next) and work forward, or start
at the tail of the list (dummy.prev) and work backward. This allows us to
reach the ith node in O(1 + min{i, n − i}) time:

   get node(i)
      if i < n/2 then
          p ← dummy.next
          repeat i times
             p ← p.next
      else
          p ← dummy

§3.2                             Linked Lists

           repeat n − i times
              p ← p.prev
        return p

    The get(i) and set(i, x) operations are now also easy. We first find the
ith node and then get or set its x value:

   get(i)
      return get node(i).x

   set(i, x)
      u ← get node(i)
      y ← u.x
      u.x ← x
      return y

    The running time of these operations is dominated by the time it takes
to find the ith node, and is therefore O(1 + min{i, n − i}).

3.2.1    Adding and Removing

If we have a reference to a node w in a DLList and we want to insert a node
u before w, then this is just a matter of setting u.next = w, u.prev = w.prev,
and then adjusting u.prev.next and u.next.prev. (See Figure 3.3.) Thanks
to the dummy node, there is no need to worry about w.prev or w.next not
existing.

   add before(w, x)
     u ← DLList.Node(x)
     u.prev ← w.prev
     u.next ← w
     u.next.prev ← u
     u.prev.next ← u
     n ← n+1
     return u

                        DLList: A Doubly-Linked List                    §3.2

                         u.prev      u
                                            u.next

                 ···                         w            ···

Figure 3.3: Adding the node u before the node w in a DLList.

    Now, the list operation add(i, x) is trivial to implement. We find the
ith node in the DLList and insert a new node u that contains x just before
it.

   add(i, x)
     add before(get node(i), x)

    The only non-constant part of the running time of add(i, x) is the time
it takes to find the ith node (using get node(i)). Thus, add(i, x) runs in
O(1 + min{i, n − i}) time.
    Removing a node w from a DLList is easy. We only need to adjust
pointers at w.next and w.prev so that they skip over w. Again, the use of
the dummy node eliminates the need to consider any special cases:

   remove(w)
     w.prev.next ← w.next
     w.next.prev ← w.prev
     n ← n−1

   Now the remove(i) operation is trivial. We find the node with index i
and remove it:

   remove(i)
     remove(get node(i))

   Again, the only expensive part of this operation is finding the ith node
using get node(i), so remove(i) runs in O(1 + min{i, n − i}) time.

3.2.2   Summary

The following theorem summarizes the performance of a DLList:

Theorem 3.2. A DLList implements the List interface. In this implemen-
tation, the get(i), set(i, x), add(i, x) and remove(i) operations run in O(1 +
min{i, n − i}) time per operation.

    It is worth noting that, if we ignore the cost of the get node(i) opera-
tion, then all operations on a DLList take constant time. Thus, the only
expensive part of operations on a DLList is finding the relevant node.
Once we have the relevant node, adding, removing, or accessing the data
at that node takes only constant time.
    This is in sharp contrast to the array-based List implementations of
Chapter 2; in those implementations, the relevant array item can be found
in constant time. However, addition or removal requires shifting ele-
ments in the array and, in general, takes non-constant time.
    For this reason, linked list structures are well-suited to applications
where references to list nodes can be obtained through external means.

3.3     SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List

One of the drawbacks of linked lists (besides the time it takes to access
elements that are deep within the list) is their space usage. Each node in
a DLList requires an additional two references to the next and previous
nodes in the list. Two of the fields in a Node are dedicated to maintaining
the list, and only one of the fields is for storing data!
   An SEList (space-efficient list) reduces this wasted space using a sim-
ple idea: Rather than store individual elements in a DLList, we store a
block (array) containing several items. More precisely, an SEList is pa-
rameterized by a block size b. Each individual node in an SEList stores a
block that can hold up to b + 1 elements.
   For reasons that will become clear later, it will be helpful if we can do

                    SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List               §3.3

Deque operations on each block. The data structure that we choose for
this is a BDeque (bounded deque), derived from the ArrayDeque struc-
ture described in Section 2.4. The BDeque differs from the ArrayDeque in
one small way: When a new BDeque is created, the size of the backing ar-
ray a is fixed at b + 1 and never grows or shrinks. The important property
of a BDeque is that it allows for the addition or removal of elements at
either the front or back in constant time. This will be useful as elements
are shifted from one block to another.
    An SEList is just a doubly-linked list of blocks. In addition to next and
prev pointers, each node u in an SEList contains a BDeque, u.d.

3.3.1   Space Requirements

An SEList places very tight restrictions on the number of elements in a
block: Unless a block is the last block, then that block contains at least
b − 1 and at most b + 1 elements. This means that, if an SEList contains n
elements, then it has at most

                           n/(b − 1) + 1 = O(n/b)

blocks. The BDeque for each block contains an array of length b + 1 but,
for every block except the last, at most a constant amount of space is
wasted in this array. The remaining memory used by a block is also con-
stant. This means that the wasted space in an SEList is only O(b + n/b).
                                                     √
By choosing a value of b within a constant factor of n, we can make
                                              √
the space-overhead of an SEList approach the n lower bound given in
Section 2.6.2.

3.3.2   Finding Elements

The first challenge we face with an SEList is finding the list item with a
given index i. Note that the location of an element consists of two parts:

  1. The node u that contains the block that contains the element with
     index i; and

  2. the index j of the element within its block.

    To find the block that contains a particular element, we proceed the
same way as we do in a DLList. We either start at the front of the list and
traverse in the forward direction, or at the back of the list and traverse
backwards until we reach the node we want. The only difference is that,
each time we move from one node to the next, we skip over a whole block
of elements.

   get location(i)
      if i < n div 2 then
          u ← dummy.next
          while i ≥ u.d.size() do
             i ← i − u.d.size()
             u ← u.next
          return u, i
      else
          u ← dummy
          idx ← n
          while i < idx do
             u ← u.prev
             idx ← idx − u.d.size()
      return u, i − idx

     Remember that, with the exception of at most one block, each block
contains at least b − 1 elements, so each step in our search gets us b − 1
elements closer to the element we are looking for. If we are searching
forward, this means that we reach the node we want after O(1 + i/b)
steps. If we search backwards, then we reach the node we want after
O(1 + (n − i)/b) steps. The algorithm takes the smaller of these two quanti-
ties depending on the value of i, so the time to locate the item with index
i is O(1 + min{i, n − i}/b).
    Once we know how to locate the item with index i, the get(i) and
set(i, x) operations translate into getting or setting a particular index in
the correct block:

                      SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List                  §3.3

   get(i)
      u, j ← get location(i)
      return u.d.get(j)

   set(i, x)
      u, j ← get location(i)
      return u.d.set(j, x)

   The running times of these operations are dominated by the time it
takes to locate the item, so they also run in O(1 + min{i, n − i}/b) time.

3.3.3   Adding an Element

Adding elements to an SEList is a little more complicated. Before consid-
ering the general case, we consider the easier operation, add(x), in which
x is added to the end of the list. If the last block is full (or does not exist
because there are no blocks yet), then we first allocate a new block and
append it to the list of blocks. Now that we are sure that the last block
exists and is not full, we append x to the last block.

   append(x)
     last ← dummy.prev
     if last = dummy or last.d.size() = b + 1 then
         last ← add before(dummy)
     last.d.append(x)
     n ← n+1

     Things get more complicated when we add to the interior of the list
using add(i, x). We first locate i to get the node u whose block contains the
ith list item. The problem is that we want to insert x into u’s block, but
we have to be prepared for the case where u’s block already contains b + 1
elements, so that it is full and there is no room for x.
     Let u0 , u1 , u2 , . . . denote u, u.next, u.next.next, and so on. We explore
u0 , u1 , u2 , . . . looking for a node that can provide space for x. Three cases

 ···    a   b   c   d     e   f   g     h        i   j           ···

 ···    a   x   b   c    d    e   f     g        h   i   j       ···

 ···    a   b   c   d     e   f   g     h

 ···    a   x   b   c    d    e   f     g        h

 ···    a   b   c   d     e   f   g     h        i   j   k   l   ···

 ···    a   x   b   c    d    e   f              g   h   i         j   k   l   ···

Figure 3.4: The three cases that occur during the addition of an item x in the
interior of an SEList. (This SEList has block size b = 3.)

can occur during our space exploration (see Figure 3.4):

   1. We quickly (in r + 1 ≤ b steps) find a node ur whose block is not full.
      In this case, we perform r shifts of an element from one block into
      the next, so that the free space in ur becomes a free space in u0 . We
      can then insert x into u0 ’s block.

   2. We quickly (in r + 1 ≤ b steps) run off the end of the list of blocks. In
      this case, we add a new empty block to the end of the list of blocks
      and proceed as in the first case.

   3. After b steps we do not find any block that is not full. In this case,
      u0 , . . . , ub−1 is a sequence of b blocks that each contain b+1 elements.
      We insert a new block ub at the end of this sequence and spread the
      original b(b + 1) elements so that each block of u0 , . . . , ub contains
      exactly b elements. Now u0 ’s block contains only b elements so it
      has room for us to insert x.

                    SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List              §3.3

   add(i, x)
     if i = n then
         append(x)
         return
     u, j ← get location(i)
     r←0
     w←u
     while r < b and w , dummy and w.d.size() = b + 1 do
         w ← w.next
         r ← r+1
     if r = b then # b blocks, each with b+1 elements
         spread(u)
         w←u
     if w = dummy then # ran off the end - add new node
         w ← add before(w)
     while w , u do # work backwards, shifting elements as we go
         w.d.add first(w.prev.d.remove last())
         w ← w.prev
     w.d.add(j, x)
     n ← n+1

    The running time of the add(i, x) operation depends on which of the
three cases above occurs. Cases 1 and 2 involve examining and shifting
elements through at most b blocks and take O(b) time. Case 3 involves
calling the spread(u) method, which moves b(b + 1) elements and takes
O(b2 ) time. If we ignore the cost of Case 3 (which we will account for
later with amortization) this means that the total running time to locate i
and perform the insertion of x is O(b + min{i, n − i}/b).

3.3.4   Removing an Element

Removing an element from an SEList is similar to adding an element.
We first locate the node u that contains the element with index i. Now,
we have to be prepared for the case where we cannot remove an element
from u without causing u’s block to become smaller than b − 1.

        ···     a   b              c   d              e   f   g        ···

        ···     a   c              d   e              f   g            ···

        ···     a   b              c   d              e   f

        ···     a   c              d   e              f

        ···     a   b              c   d              e   f            ···

        ···     a   c              d   e     f                         ···

Figure 3.5: The three cases that occur during the removal of an item x in the
interior of an SEList. (This SEList has block size b = 3.)

   Again, let u0 , u1 , u2 , . . . denote u, u.next, u.next.next, and so on. We ex-
amine u0 , u1 , u2 , . . . in order to look for a node from which we can borrow
an element to make the size of u0 ’s block at least b − 1. There are three
cases to consider (see Figure 3.5):

   1. We quickly (in r + 1 ≤ b steps) find a node whose block contains
      more than b − 1 elements. In this case, we perform r shifts of an
      element from one block into the previous one, so that the extra ele-
      ment in ur becomes an extra element in u0 . We can then remove the
      appropriate element from u0 ’s block.

   2. We quickly (in r + 1 ≤ b steps) run off the end of the list of blocks.
      In this case, ur is the last block, and there is no need for ur ’s block
      to contain at least b − 1 elements. Therefore, we proceed as above,
      borrowing an element from ur to make an extra element in u0 . If
      this causes ur ’s block to become empty, then we remove it.

   3. After b steps, we do not find any block containing more than b − 1
      elements. In this case, u0 , . . . , ub−1 is a sequence of b blocks that

                       SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List                  §3.3

        each contain b − 1 elements. We gather these b(b − 1) elements into
        u0 , . . . , ub−2 so that each of these b − 1 blocks contains exactly b el-
        ements and we remove ub−1 , which is now empty. Now u0 ’s block
        contains b elements and we can then remove the appropriate ele-
        ment from it.

   remove(i)
     u, j ← get location(i)
     y ← u.d.get(j)
     w←u
     r←0
     while r < b and w , dummy and w.d.size() = b − 1 do
         w ← w.next
         r ← r+1
     if r = b then # b blocks, each with b-1 elements
         gather(u)
     u.d.remove(j)
     while u.d.size() < b − 1 and u.next , dummy do
         u.d.add last(u.next.d.remove first())
         u ← u.next
     if u.d.size() = 0 then remove node(u)
     n ← n−1

    Like the add(i, x) operation, the running time of the remove(i) opera-
tion is O(b + min{i, n − i}/b) if we ignore the cost of the gather(u) method
that occurs in Case 3.

3.3.5    Amortized Analysis of Spreading and Gathering

Next, we consider the cost of the gather(u) and spread(u) methods that
may be executed by the add(i, x) and remove(i) methods. For the sake of
completeness, here they are:

   spread(u)
      w←u

       for j in 0, 1, 2, . . . , b − 1 do
          w ← w.next
       w ← add before(w)
       while w , u do
          while w.d.size() < b do
              w.d.add first(w.prev.d.remove last())
          w ← w.prev

   gather(u)
      w←u
      for j in 0, 1, 2, . . . , b − 2 do
         while w.d.size() < b do
             w.d.add last(w.next.d.remove first())
         w ← w.next
      remove node(w)

    The running time of each of these methods is dominated by the two
nested loops. Both the inner and outer loops execute at most b + 1 times,
so the total running time of each of these methods is O((b + 1)2 ) = O(b2 ).
However, the following lemma shows that these methods execute on at
most one out of every b calls to add(i, x) or remove(i).

Lemma 3.1. If an empty SEList is created and any sequence of m ≥ 1 calls to
add(i, x) and remove(i) is performed, then the total time spent during all calls
to spread() and gather() is O(bm).

Proof. We will use the potential method of amortized analysis. We say
that a node u is fragile if u’s block does not contain b elements (so that u is
either the last node, or contains b − 1 or b + 1 elements). Any node whose
block contains b elements is rugged. Define the potential of an SEList as
the number of fragile nodes it contains. We will consider only the add(i, x)
operation and its relation to the number of calls to spread(u). The analysis
of remove(i) and gather(u) is identical.
    Notice that, if Case 1 occurs during the add(i, x) method, then only one
node, ur has the size of its block changed. Therefore, at most one node,

                       SEList: A Space-Efficient Linked List                    §3.3

namely ur , goes from being rugged to being fragile. If Case 2 occurs, then
a new node is created, and this node is fragile, but no other node changes
size, so the number of fragile nodes increases by one. Thus, in either
Case 1 or Case 2 the potential of the SEList increases by at most one.
    Finally, if Case 3 occurs, it is because u0 , . . . , ub−1 are all fragile nodes.
Then spread(u0 ) is called and these b fragile nodes are replaced with b + 1
rugged nodes. Finally, x is added to u0 ’s block, making u0 fragile. In total
the potential decreases by b − 1.
    In summary, the potential starts at 0 (there are no nodes in the list).
Each time Case 1 or Case 2 occurs, the potential increases by at most 1.
Each time Case 3 occurs, the potential decreases by b − 1. The poten-
tial (which counts the number of fragile nodes) is never less than 0. We
conclude that, for every occurrence of Case 3, there are at least b − 1 oc-
currences of Case 1 or Case 2. Thus, for every call to spread(u) there are
at least b calls to add(i, x). This completes the proof.

3.3.6   Summary

The following theorem summarizes the performance of the SEList data
structure:

Theorem 3.3. An SEList implements the List interface. Ignoring the cost
of calls to spread(u) and gather(u), an SEList with block size b supports the
operations

    • get(i) and set(i, x) in O(1 + min{i, n − i}/b) time per operation; and

    • add(i, x) and remove(i) in O(b + min{i, n − i}/b) time per operation.

Furthermore, beginning with an empty SEList, any sequence of m add(i, x)
and remove(i) operations results in a total of O(bm) time spent during all
calls to spread(u) and gather(u).
    The space (measured in words)1 used by an SEList that stores n elements
is n + O(b + n/b).

    The SEList is a trade-off between an ArrayList and a DLList where the
relative mix of these two structures depends on the block size b. At the
  1 Recall Section 1.4 for a discussion of how memory is measured.

§3.4                            Linked Lists

extreme b = 2, each SEList node stores at most three values, which is not
much different than a DLList. At the other extreme, b > n, all the elements
are stored in a single array, just like in an ArrayList. In between these two
extremes lies a trade-off between the time it takes to add or remove a list
item and the time it takes to locate a particular list item.

3.4    Discussion and Exercises

Both singly-linked and doubly-linked lists are established techniques,
having been used in programs for over 40 years. They are discussed,
for example, by Knuth [46, Sections 2.2.3–2.2.5]. Even the SEList data
structure seems to be a well-known data structures exercise. The SEList
is sometimes referred to as an unrolled linked list [67].
    Another way to save space in a doubly-linked list is to use so-called
XOR-lists. In an XOR-list, each node, u, contains only one pointer, called
u.nextprev, that holds the bitwise exclusive-or of u.prev and u.next. The
list itself needs to store two pointers, one to the dummy node and one to
dummy.next (the first node, or dummy if the list is empty). This technique
uses the fact that, if we have pointers to u and u.prev, then we can extract
u.next using the formula

                        u.next = u.prevˆu.nextprev .

(Here ˆ computes the bitwise exclusive-or of its two arguments.) This
technique complicates the code a little and is not possible in some lan-
guages, like Java and Python, that have garbage collection but gives a
doubly-linked list implementation that requires only one pointer per node.
See Sinha’s magazine article [68] for a detailed discussion of XOR-lists.

Exercise 3.1. Why is it not possible to use a dummy node in an SLList
to avoid all the special cases that occur in the operations push(x), pop(),
add(x), and remove()?

Exercise 3.2. Design and implement an SLList method, second last(),
that returns the second-last element of an SLList. Do this without us-
ing the member variable, n, that keeps track of the size of the list.

                            Discussion and Exercises                         §3.4

Exercise 3.3. Implement the List operations get(i), set(i, x), add(i, x) and
remove(i) on an SLList. Each of these operations should run in O(1 + i)
time.

Exercise 3.4. Design and implement an SLList method, reverse() that re-
verses the order of elements in an SLList. This method should run in
O(n) time, should not use recursion, should not use any secondary data
structures, and should not create any new nodes.

Exercise 3.5. Design and implement SLList and DLList methods called
check size(). These methods walk through the list and count the number
of nodes to see if this matches the value, n, stored in the list. These meth-
ods return nothing, but throw an exception if the size they compute does
not match the value of n.

Exercise 3.6. Try to recreate the code for the add before(w) operation that
creates a node, u, and adds it in a DLList just before the node w. Do not
refer to this chapter. Even if your code does not exactly match the code
given in this book it may still be correct. Test it and see if it works.

   The next few exercises involve performing manipulations on DLLists.
You should complete them without allocating any new nodes or tempo-
rary arrays. They can all be done only by changing the prev and next
values of existing nodes.

Exercise 3.7. Write a DLList method is palindrome() that returns true
if the list is a palindrome, i.e., the element at position i is equal to the
element at position n − i − 1 for all i ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}. Your code should run
in O(n) time.

Exercise 3.8. Implement a method rotate(r) that “rotates” a DLList so
that list item i becomes list item (i + r) mod n. This method should run in
O(1 + min{r, n − r}) time and should not modify any nodes in the list.

Exercise 3.9. Write a method, truncate(i), that truncates a DLList at po-
sition i. After executing this method, the size of the list will be i and it
should contain only the elements at indices 0, . . . , i − 1. The return value
is another DLList that contains the elements at indices i, . . . , n − 1. This
method should run in O(min{i, n − i}) time.

§3.4                               Linked Lists

Exercise 3.10. Write a DLList method, absorb(l2 ), that takes as an argu-
ment a DLList, l2 , empties it and appends its contents, in order, to the
receiver. For example, if l1 contains a, b, c and l2 contains d, e, f , then after
calling l1 .absorb(l2 ), l1 will contain a, b, c, d, e, f and l2 will be empty.

Exercise 3.11. Write a method deal() that removes all the elements with
odd-numbered indices from a DLList and return a DLList containing
these elements. For example, if l1 , contains the elements a, b, c, d, e, f , then
after calling l1 .deal(), l1 should contain a, c, e and a list containing b, d, f
should be returned.

Exercise 3.12. Write a method, reverse(), that reverses the order of ele-
ments in a DLList.

Exercise 3.13. This exercise walks you through an implementation of the
merge-sort algorithm for sorting a DLList, as discussed in Section 11.1.1.

   1. Write a DLList method called take first(l2 ). This method takes the
      first node from l2 and appends it to the the receiving list. This is
      equivalent to add(size(), l2 .remove(0)), except that it should not cre-
      ate a new node.

   2. Write a DLList static method, merge(l1 , l2 ), that takes two sorted
      lists l1 and l2 , merges them, and returns a new sorted list containing
      the result. This causes l1 and l2 to be emptied in the proces. For
      example, if l1 contains a, c, d and l2 contains b, e, f , then this method
      returns a new list containing a, b, c, d, e, f .

   3. Write a DLList method sort() that sorts the elements contained in
      the list using the merge sort algorithm. This recursive algorithm
      works in the following way:

       (a) If the list contains 0 or 1 elements then there is nothing to do.
           Otherwise,
       (b) Using the truncate(size()/2) method, split the list into two lists
           of approximately equal length, l1 and l2 ;
       (c) Recursively sort l1 ;
       (d) Recursively sort l2 ; and, finally,

                          Discussion and Exercises                       §3.4

       (e) Merge l1 and l2 into a single sorted list.

   The next few exercises are more advanced and require a clear under-
standing of what happens to the minimum value stored in a Stack or
Queue as items are added and removed.

Exercise 3.14. Design and implement a MinStack data structure that can
store comparable elements and supports the stack operations push(x),
pop(), and size(), as well as the min() operation, which returns the mini-
mum value currently stored in the data structure. All operations should
run in constant time.

Exercise 3.15. Design and implement a MinQueue data structure that
can store comparable elements and supports the queue operations add(x),
remove(), and size(), as well as the min() operation, which returns the
minimum value currently stored in the data structure. All operations
should run in constant amortized time.

Exercise 3.16. Design and implement a MinDeque data structure that
can store comparable elements and supports all the deque operations
add first(x), add last(x) remove first(), remove last() and size(), and the
min() operation, which returns the minimum value currently stored in
the data structure. All operations should run in constant amortized time.

   The next exercises are designed to test the reader’s understanding of
the implementation and analysis of the space-efficient SEList:

Exercise 3.17. Prove that, if an SEList is used like a Stack (so that the only
modifications to the SEList are done using push(x) ≡ add(size(), x) and
pop() ≡ remove(size() − 1)), then these operations run in constant amor-
tized time, independent of the value of b.

Exercise 3.18. Design and implement of a version of an SEList that sup-
ports all the Deque operations in constant amortized time per operation,
independent of the value of b.

Exercise 3.19. Explain how to use the bitwise exclusive-or operator, ˆ, to
swap the values of two int variables without using a third variable.

