Chapter1

Overview of Compilation

ABSTRACT
A compiler is a computer program that translates a program written in one
language into a program written in another language. At the same time,
a compiler is a large software system with many internal components and
algorithms. These components interact in complex ways. The study of com-
piler construction is both an introduction to techniques for the translation
and improvement of programs, and a practical exercise in software en-
gineering. This chapter provides a conceptual overview of all the major
components of a modern compiler.

KEYWORDS
Compiler, Interpreter, Automatic Translation

1.1 INTRODUCTION

The role of the computer in daily life grows each year. Computers play criti-
cal roles in entertainment, communication, transportation, medical devices,
design, manufacturing, and even mundane devices such as household ther-
mostats. Computation has created entirely new categories of activity, from
video games to social networks. It has changed the way that we predict
weather and that we receive the news. Embedded computers synchronize
traffic lights and deliver e-mail to your pocket.

Almost all computer applications rely on software—computer programs
Compiler
a computer program that translates other
computer programs

In the text, we use the terms “code” and
“program” to mean either some part of a
program or the whole program. The mean-
ing should be clear from context.

that build virtual tools on top of the low-level abstractions provided by
the underlying hardware. Almost all of that software is translated by a tool
called a compiler. A compiler is simply a computer program that translates
other computer programs to prepare them for execution. This book presents
the fundamental techniques of automatic translation that are used in com-
piler construction. It describes many of the challenges that compiler writers
face and the algorithms that they use to address them.

Conceptual Roadmap

A compiler translates software written in one language into another lan-
guage. To translate text from one language to another, the tool must un-



derstand both the form, or syntax, and content, or meaning, of the input
language. It needs to understand the rules that govern syntax and meaning
in the output language. Finally, it needs a scheme for mapping content from
the source language to the target language.

The structure of a typical compiler derives from these simple observations.
The compiler has a front end to deal with the source language. It has a
back end to deal with the target language. Connecting the front end and
the back end, it has a formal structure for representing the program in an
intermediate representation (IR), whose meaning is largely independent of
either language. Most compilers include an optimizer that sits between the
front end and the back end; the optimizer analyzes the IR and rewrites it into
a form that is, under one or more metrics, better.

Overview

Computer programs are simply sequences of abstract operations written in
a programming language—a formal language designed for expressing com-
putation. Programming languages have rigid properties and meanings—in
contrast with natural languages, such as Chinese, Portuguese, or English.
Programming languages are designed for expressiveness, conciseness, and
clarity. Natural languages allow ambiguity. Programming languages are de-
signed to avoid ambiguity; an ambiguous program might have multiple
meanings. Programming languages should precisely specify computations;
ambiguity can destroy that precision.

Programming languages are, in general, designed to allow humans to ex-
press computations as sequences of operations. Computer processors, here-
after referred to as processors, microprocessors, or machines, are designed
to execute sequences of operations. The operations that a processor imple-
ments are, for the most part, at a much lower level of abstraction than those
specified in a programming language. For example, a programming lan-
guage typically includes a concise way to print some number to a file. That
single programming language statement translates into hundreds or thou-
sands of machine operations that run when it executes.

The tool that performs such translations is called a compiler. The compiler
takes as input a program written in some language and produces as its out-



put an equivalent program. In the classic notion of a compiler, the output
program is expressed in the operations available on some specific proces-
sor, often called the target machine. Viewed as an opaque box, a compiler
might look like this:

Typical “source” languages might be C, C++, JAVA, ML, or RUBY. The
Instruction set
The set of operations that a processor pro-
vides is its instruction set.

The overall design of an instruction set is
often called an instruction set architecture
or ISA.

“target” language is usually the instruction set of some processor.

Some compilers produce a target program written in a human-oriented pro-
gramming language rather than the assembly language of some computer.
The programs that these compilers produce require further translation before
they can execute directly on a computer. Many research compilers produce

C programs as their output. Because C compilers are available on most com-
puters, this makes the target program executable on all those systems, at the
cost of an extra compilation for the final target. Compilers that target pro-
gramming languages rather than the instruction set of a computer are often
called source-to-source translators.

Many other systems qualify as compilers. For example, a typesetting pro-
gram that produces PostScript can be considered a compiler. It takes as
input a specification for how the document should look on the printed page
and it produces as output a PostScript file. PostScript is simply a language
for describing images. Because the typesetting program takes an executable
specification and produces another executable specification, it is a compiler.

The code that turns PostScript into pixels is typically an interpreter, not
a compiler. An interpreter takes as input an executable specification and
produces as output the result of executing the specification.

Some languages, such as PERL, PYTHON, RUST, and SCHEME, are more
often implemented with interpreters than with compilers.



Historically, most compilers were designed to run in a separate step before
Ahead-of-time compiler
a traditional compiler where translation
occurs in a separate step from execution
execution. There were exceptions, but the ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation
model was the rule. In recent years, programming languages and systems
have emerged where it makes sense to delay compilation. These systems,
Just-in-time compiler
a compiler where translation occurs at run-
time
called runtime optimizers or just-in-time (JIT) compilers, translate the code
to executable form at runtime. This strategy adds the JIT-compilation cost
to the program’s running time, so the improvement in performance must
compensate for the time spent in the JIT compiler.

JIT compilation can lead to complex translation schemes. For example,
Virtual machine
A virtual machine is a simulator for the ISA
of an idealized processor.
JAVA’s execution model includes both compilation and interpretation. JAVA
is compiled from source code into a more compact representation called

JAVA bytecode by an AOT compiler. The application executes by running
the bytecode on the JAVA Virtual Machine (JVM), an emulator, or inter-
preter, for JAVA bytecode. To improve performance, many implementations
of the JVM include a JIT that compiles and optimizes heavily used bytecode
sequences. Chapter 14 explores some of the issues that arise in building a

JIT.

Interpreters and compilers have much in common. They perform many of
the same tasks. Both analyze the input program and determine whether or
not it is a valid program. Both build an internal model of the structure and
meaning of the program. Both determine where to store values during exe-
cution. However, interpreting the code to produce a result is quite different
from emitting a translated program that can be executed to produce the re-
sult. This book focuses on the problems that arise in building compilers.
However, an implementor of interpreters may find much of the material rel-
evant.

Why Study Compiler Construction?

The authors, of course, feel that the material in a course on compiler con-
struction is intrinsically fascinating. Students, on the other hand, often want
more concrete reasons to invest their time. We see two distinct answers: one
pedagogical and the other practical.

For the student, compiler construction is a capstone exercise that brings to-
gether elements from across computer science and applies them in a large
design and implementation project. A good compiler makes practical use
of greedy algorithms (register allocation), heuristic search techniques (list
scheduling), graph algorithms (dead-code elimination), dynamic program-
ming (instruction selection), automata theory (scanning and parsing), and
fixed-point algorithms (data-flow analysis). It deals with problems such as
dynamic allocation, synchronization, naming, locality, memory hierarchy



MAY YOU STUDY COMPILERS IN INTERESTING TIMES
In 1951, Grace Murray Hopper wrote A0, considered by some to be the first
compiler. By the early 1970s, compilers could generate high-quality code for
the machines of the day. Why, then, is compiler construction still a subject of
study and research? Changes in languages and computing environments
pose a variety of challenges that require compiler writers to adapt their
practices to obtain best results.

The general freeze on single-thread performance, decried as the end of
Dennard scaling and Moore’s law, has driven system designers to focus on
improvements in architecture and parallelism. These changes, in turn, create
new challenges in optimization and code generation.

The adoption of language features such as object orientation, late binding of
names to types and classes, dynamic loading, and polymorphism has
introduced new runtime costs. These features create new opportunities for
program analyses and optimizations that reduce their runtime overhead.

Finally, compiled code has found application in new settings, from
smartphones to hearing aids and doorbells, and new modes of use, from JIT
compilation to shared code caches. As computing moves in new directions,
the objectives and constraints for compilation change, bringing about new
problems and new solutions.

management, and pipeline scheduling. Few other software systems bring
together as many complex and diverse components.

Compilers demonstrate the successful application of theory to practice. The
tools developed to generate scanners and parsers apply results from formal
language theory. These same tools are used in text searches, website filters,
and word processors; they are used to understand markup languages, script-
ing languages, and router specifications. Type checking and static analysis
apply results from lattice theory, number theory, and other branches of
mathematics to understand and improve programs. Code generators use al-
gorithms for tree-pattern matching, parsing, dynamic programming, and text
matching to automate the selection of instructions.

Building a successful compiler requires expertise, engineering, and plan-
ning. Good compilers approximate the solutions to hard problems. They
emphasize efficiency, in their own implementations and in the code they
generate. They have internal data structures and knowledge representations
that expose the right level of detail—enough to allow strong optimization,
but not enough to force the compiler to wallow in detail. Compiler con-
struction brings together ideas and techniques from across the breadth of



computer science and applies them in a constrained setting to solve some
truly hard problems.

For the programmer, compiler construction reveals the cost of the abstrac-
tions that programs use, from case statements to procedure calls, from regex
libraries to hash maps. A programmer cannot effectively tune an applica-
tion’s performance without knowing the costs of its individual parts. In
general, programmers should design with appropriate abstractions. Then,
if performance is an issue, they should measure performance, determine
where the code spends its time, and reimplement that specific functionality
in a lower-cost way.

This approach, however, requires that the programmer understands how the
source-language’s abstractions translate into the target-machine’s code. For
example:

■
Equality comparisons between strings typically require time propor-
tional to the length of the strings, while equality tests between integers
are both O(1) and fast. This fact suggests hashing strings into small in-
tegers when possible.

■
Consider implementing a simple translation a = f(x) with a hash map
versus a simple vector. Both are, arguably, O(1). The cost difference,
however, might be a factor of ten or more. Whether or not this matters
depends on the sparsity of f’s range and how often the code invokes f.

The study of compilation helps a programmer to understand many of the
fundamental tradeoffs that arise in actual implementations. This knowledge
should, in turn, inform better design decisions.

The Fundamental Principles of Compilation

Compilers are large, complex, carefully engineered objects. While many
issues in compiler design are amenable to multiple solutions and interpreta-
tions, there are two fundamental principles that a compiler writer must keep
in mind. The first principle is inviolable:

The compiler must preserve the meaning of the input program.

Correctness is a fundamental issue in programming. The compiler must
faithfully implement the “meaning” of its input program. This principle lies
at the heart of the social contract between the compiler writer and the com-
piler user. If the compiler can take liberties with meaning, then why not
simply generate a nop or a return? If an incorrect translation is acceptable,
why expend the effort to get it right?



The second principle that a compiler must observe is practical:

The compiler must discernibly improve the input program.

A traditional compiler improves the input program by making it directly
executable on some target machine. Other “compilers” improve their input
in different ways. For example, tpic is a program that takes the specifica-
tion for a drawing written in the graphics language pic and converts it into
LATEX; the “improvement” lies in LATEX’s greater availability and generality.
A source-to-source translator that maps PYTHON into C should produce
an output program that produces the same output as the original program;
that output program should execute much faster than the original PYTHON
code.

1.2 COMPILER STRUCTURE

A compiler is a large, complex software system. The community has been
building compilers since 1951 and has learned many lessons about how to
structure a compiler. In reality, a compiler is more complex than the simple
opaque box shown earlier.

Fundamentally, a compiler must both understand the source program that it
takes as input and map its functionality to the target machine. The distinct
nature of these two tasks suggests a division of labor and leads to a design
that decomposes compilation into two major pieces: a front end and a back
end.

The front end focuses on understanding the source-language program. The
back end focuses on mapping programs to the target machine. This sep-
aration of concerns has several important implications for the design and
implementation of compilers.

The front end must encode its knowledge of the source program in some
Intermediate representation
A compiler uses some set of data structures
to represent the code that it processes. That
form is called an intermediate representa-
tion, or IR.

structure, an intermediate representation (IR), for later use. The IR becomes
the compiler’s definitive representation for the code it is compiling. At each
point in the process, the compiler will have a definitive representation. It
may, in fact, use several different IRs for different purposes, but, at each
point, one representation will be the definitive IR. We think of the definitive



A FEW WORDS ABOUT TIME
One of the hardest issues that arises in the study of compiler construction is
time—specifically, keeping track of when various things happen. Some
decisions are made when the compiler is designed, at design time. Some
algorithms run when the compiler is built, at build time. Many activities take
place when the compiler itself runs, at compile time. Finally, the compiled
code can execute multiple times, at runtime.

The study of compiler construction involves thinking about each of these
different times: what algorithms and data structures exist at each time, and
how behavior that occurs at one time is planned at another time.

Each chapter, after this introduction, has a brief discussion of time as part of
the introduction. These discussions, under the header A Few Words About
Time, highlight how the techniques described in that chapter fit into these
different temporal slots.

IR as the version of the program passed between independent phases of
the compiler, like the IR passed from the front end to the back end in the
preceding drawing.

In a two-phase compiler, the front end must ensure that the source program
is well formed, and it must map that code into the IR. The back end must
map the IR program into the instruction set and the finite resources of the
target machine. Because the back end only processes an IR created by the
front end, it can assume that the IR contains no syntactic or semantic er-
rors.

The compiler can make multiple passes over the IR form of the code before
emitting the target program. Because the compiler can analyze the code in
one phase and use the resulting knowledge in another, this multipass ap-
proach leads to better code than a single pass can produce. This strategy
requires that knowledge derived in the first pass be recorded in the IR, where
later passes can find and use it.

Finally, the two-phase structure may simplify the process of retargeting the
Retargeting
The task of changing the compiler to gener-
ate code for a new processor is often called
retargeting the compiler.

compiler. We can easily envision constructing multiple back ends for a sin-
gle front end to produce compilers that accept the same language but target
different ISAs. Similarly, we can envision front ends for different languages
producing the same IR and using a common back end. Both scenarios as-
sume that one IR can serve for several combinations of source and target;
in practice, both language-specific and machine-specific details usually find
their way into the IR.



■ FIGURE 1.1 Internal Structure of a Typical Compiler.

Introducing an IR lets the compiler writer add a phase between the front
Optimizer
The middle section of a compiler, called an
optimizer, analyzes and transforms the IR
in an attempt to improve it.

end and the back end. This middle phase, or optimizer, tries to improve
the IR program. With the IR as an interface, the compiler writer can insert
optimizations with minimal disruption to the front end and back end. The
result is a three-phase compiler.

The optimizer is an IR-to-IR transformer, or a series of them, that tries to
The individual passes, or transformations,
in an optimizer are, themselves, compilers
according to our earlier definition.
improve the IR program in some way. The optimizer can make one or more
passes over the IR, analyze the IR, and rewrite the IR. The optimizer may
rewrite the IR in a way that is likely to produce a faster target program from
the back end or a smaller target program from the back end. It may have
other objectives, such as a program that produces fewer page faults or uses
less energy.

Conceptually, the three-phase structure represents the classic optimizing
compiler. In practice, each phase is divided internally into a series of passes.
The front end has two or three distinct passes that combine to recognize
valid source-language programs and produce the initial IR form of the pro-
gram. The optimizer contains passes that use distinct analyses and transfor-
mations to improve the code. The number and purpose of these passes vary
from compiler to compiler. The back end consists of a series of passes, each
of which takes the IR program one step closer to the target machine’s in-
struction set. The three phases and their individual passes share a common
infrastructure. This structure is shown in Fig. 1.1.



SEPARATE COMPILATION
Most compiler systems support separate compilation. The programmer can
compile distinct files of code in independent steps, often at different times.
Each of these compilations produces a file of object code. Multiple object
code files can be linked together to form a single executable.

Separate compilation lets the programmer limit the amount of code that
must be compiled after a change to the program. It saves a huge amount of
compile time. (Imagine changing one line of code in a million-line program
and having to recompile the entire program.) It enables the construction
and use of libraries. It allows multiple programmers to work independently
on a single large application. Separate compilation is critical to our ability to
build software at scale.

In practice, the conceptual division of a compiler into three phases, a front
end, an optimizer, and a back end, creates a useful separation of concerns.
Each phase addresses a different set of problems. The front end works to
understand the source program and record the results of that analysis in

IR form. The optimizer tries to improve the IR so that it produces a more
efficient execution. The back end maps the optimized IR program onto the
bounded resources of the target machine’s ISA in a way that makes efficient
use of resources.

Building a compiler as a sequence of independent passes that communicate
by using one or more common IRs has another significant advantage. This
structure lends itself more readily to debugging than does a monolithic com-
piler. During development, the compiler writer can insert a tool between
passes that checks the validity of the IR. The compiler writer can remove
passes and test them independently, or test subsets to look for unplanned
and unexpected interactions.

Of these three phases, the optimizer has the murkiest description. The term
optimization implies that the compiler discovers an optimal solution to some
problem. The issues and problems that arise in code optimization are so
complex and interrelated that they cannot, in practice, be solved optimally.
Furthermore, the actual behavior of the compiled code depends on interac-
tions among all of the techniques applied in the compiler. Thus, even if one
pass can be proved optimal, its interactions with other passes may produce
less than optimal results. As a result, a good optimizing compiler can im-
prove the quality of the code, relative to an unoptimized version. However,
an optimizing compiler makes no guarantee of optimality.



The optimizer can be a single monolithic pass that applies one or more opti-
mizations to improve the code, or it can be structured as a series of smaller
passes with each pass reading and writing IR. The monolithic structure may
be more efficient. The multipass structure may lend itself to a less complex
implementation and a simpler approach to debugging the compiler. It also
creates the flexibility to employ different sets of optimizations in different
situations. The choice between these two approaches depends on the con-
straints under which the compiler is built and operates.

1.3 OVERVIEW OF TRANSLATION

To translate code written in a programming language into code that runs
on the target machine, a compiler runs through many steps. To make this
abstract process more concrete, consider the steps needed to generate exe-
cutable code for the following expression:

a ← a × 2 × b × c × d

where a, b, c, and d are variables, ← indicates an assignment, and × is the
multiply operator. The following subsections trace the path that a compiler
takes to turn this simple assignment into executable code.

1.3.1 The Front End

Before the compiler can translate an expression into executable target-
machine code, it must understand both its form, or syntax, and its meaning,
or semantics. The front end determines if the input code is well formed, in
terms of both syntax and semantics. If it finds that the code is valid, it cre-
ates a representation of the code in the compiler’s IR; if not, it reports back
to the user with diagnostic error messages to identify the problems with the
code.

Fig. 1.1 shows the classic view of a compiler, as a series of passes. While
the optimizer and the back end work this way, the front end actually has a
somewhat different control structure, as shown in the margin. The scanner
converts the stream of characters from the input code into a stream of words.
It recognizes valid words by their spellings; for example, in most program-
ming languages, 1g2h3i is neither a valid identifier nor a valid number. The
parser fits the words from the scanner to a rule-based model of the input
language’s syntax, called a grammar. It calls the scanner incrementally as it
needs additional words. As the parser matches words to rules in the gram-
Grammar
A model of the syntax of a programming
language
mar, it may call on the elaborator to perform additional computation on
the input program. Examples of such computation include building an IR,
checking type consistency, or laying out storage.



NOTATION
Compiler books are, in essence, about notation. After all, a compiler
translates a program written in one notation into an equivalent program
written in another notation. A number of notational issues will arise in your
reading of this book. In some cases, these issues will directly affect your
understanding of the material.

Expressing Algorithms We have tried to keep the algorithms concise.
They are written at a relatively high level, assuming that the reader can
supply implementation details. They are written in a slanted, sans-serif font.
Indentation is both deliberate and significant, as in PYTHON. Indented code
forms a block. In the following code fragment,

if Action[s,word] = "shift si" then

push ⟨word, si⟩

word ← NextWord( )

else if ···

all the statements between the then and the else are part of the then clause
of the if–then–else construct. In the case of a single statement block, we
sometimes write it inline with the then or else when the meaning is clear.

Writing Code In some examples, we show actual program text written in
some language chosen to demonstrate a particular point. Actual program
text is written in a monospace font.

Arithmetic Operators Finally, we have forsaken the traditional use
of * for × and of / for ÷, except in actual program text. The meaning should
be clear to the reader.

Scanners and parsers find widespread application in other systems. Tools
generate online content in markup languages, such as HTML; browsers scan
and parse that content to display it. To exchange data, systems rewrite it
into an external format, such as YAML or standard CSV format; programs
that read the data must scan and parse it. A spreadsheet application knows
that a function, such as average, takes an argument list; it must scan and
parse formulas to find function names and to ensure the correctness of the
argument lists.

Scanners and parsers are embedded in myriad other tools. Some of them are
implemented with generators, as described in Chapters 2 and 3. Others are
implemented with ad-hoc techniques. Nonetheless, all of these scanners and
parsers should look familiar to a compiler writer.



Checking Syntax

To check the syntax of the input program, the compiler must compare the
program’s structure against the grammar that defines the language. The
grammar provides a formal definition of the language’s syntax. It also leads
to an efficient mechanism to test whether the input forms a sentence in the
language.

A grammar defines a set, usually infinite, of strings of words. It has a set of
rules, called productions, defined over the words in the language and a set
of syntactic variables introduced to provide structure.

In a grammar, the rules use parts of speech, or syntactic categories, rather
than individual words. Thus, a single rule represents many sentences. For
example, many English sentences have the form:

Sentence → Subject
verb Object endmark

where verb and endmark are parts of speech, and Sentence, Subject, and Ob-

ject are syntactic variables. Sentence represents any string with the form
described by this rule. The symbol “→” reads “derives” and means that
an instance of the right-hand side can be abstracted to the syntactic variable
on the left-hand side.

Consider a sentence like “Compilers are engineered systems.” The first step
Scanner
the compiler pass that converts a string of
characters into a stream of classified words
in understanding the syntax of this sentence is to identify distinct words
in the sentence and to classify each word according to its part of speech.
In a compiler, the scanner performs this function. The scanner converts the
input, a stream of characters, into a stream of classified words—that is, pairs
of the form (p, s), where p is the word’s part of speech and s is its spelling.
A scanner might convert the example sentence into the following stream of
classified words:

(noun, “Compilers”), (verb, “are”), (adjective, “engineered”),
(noun, “systems”), (endmark, “.”)

In practice, the string with the actual spelling of a word might be stored in
Equality tests on strings take time propor-
tional to string length. Equality tests on
small integers are usually O(1).
a hash table and represented in the pair with an integer index to simplify
equality tests. Chapter 2 explores the theory and practice of scanner con-
struction.

In the next step, the compiler tries to match the stream of words to the
rules of the grammar. For example, a working knowledge of English might
include the grammatical rules shown in Fig. 1.2. By inspection, we can



1
Sentence
→
Subject verb Object endmark

2
Subject
→
noun

3
Subject
→
Modifier noun

4
Object
→
noun

5
Object
→
Modifier noun

6
Modifier
→
adjective

■ FIGURE 1.2 Simple English Rules.

discover the following derivation for the sentence “Compilers are engi-
neered systems.”

Rule
Prototype Sentence

—
Sentence

1
Subject
verb
Object
endmark

2
noun
verb
Object
endmark

5
noun
verb
Modifier
noun
endmark

6
noun
verb
adjective
noun
endmark

The derivation starts with the syntactic variable Sentence. At each step, it
rewrites one syntactic variable in the prototype sentence, replacing it with a
right-hand side that can be derived from that rule. The first step uses rule 1
to replace Sentence. The second step uses rule 2 to replace Subject. The third
step replaces Object using rule 5, while the final step rewrites Modifier with
adjective according to rule 6. At this point, the derived sentence matches
the stream of categorized words produced by the scanner.

The derivation proves that the sentence “Compilers are engineered objects.”
Parser
the compiler pass that determines if the
input stream is a sentence in the source
language

belongs to the language described by the simple grammar formed by rules 1
through 6. The sentence is grammatically correct. The process of automati-
cally finding derivations is called parsing. Chapter 3 presents the techniques
that compilers use to parse the input program.

A grammatically correct sentence can be meaningless. For example, the sen-
tence “Rocks are green vegetables.” has the same parts of speech in the same
order as “Compilers are engineered objects.” but has no rational meaning.
To understand the difference between these two sentences requires contex-
tual knowledge about software systems, rocks, and vegetables.

When the parser finds a derivation, thus proving that the input program is
syntactically correct, it must create the various data structures required for
the rest of the compiler. That process includes building an IR version of the



input program, augmented with tables that describe each of the names in the
program; using that IR version of the code to check for type consistency;
and assigning storage to every value that the program will compute. Some
of these computations, such as building the IR for the input, are performed
incrementally as the parser works. Others, such as storage assignment, are
accomplished by iterating over the IR after the parse completes.

We refer to these additional computations as semantic elaborations. They
expand the “meaning” of the program from simple syntax to an operational
definition. During these computations, the compiler may detect errors that
occur at a deeper level than the grammar can specify. Examples include
type mismatches and errors of number, such as an array reference with the
wrong number of dimensions or a procedure call with too many parameters.
Chapter 5 explores some of the issues that arise in semantic elaboration and
the mechanisms that compiler writers use to address them.

Intermediate Representations

The final issue handled in the front end of a compiler is the generation of an
IR form of the code. A typical IR consists of a representation of the code,
plus data structures that contain additional information.

Compilers use a variety of kinds of IR, depending on the source language,
t0 ← a × 2
t1 ← t0 × b
t2 ← t1 × c
t3 ← t2 × d
a
← t3

Low-level, Sequential IR

for a ← a × 2 × b × c × d

the target language, and the specific goals of the compiler. Some IRs rep-
resent the program as a graph. Other IRs resemble a sequential assembly
code program. The code in the margin shows how our example expres-
sion, a ← a × 2 × b × c × d, might look in a low-level, sequential IR. Chapter 4
presents an overview of the kinds of IRs that compilers use.

For each source-language construct, the compiler needs a strategy for how
it will implement that construct in the IR. Specific choices affect the com-
piler’s ability to transform and improve the code. We spend both Chapter 4
and Chapter 5 on the issues that arise in generation of IR for source-code
constructs. Procedure calls are, at once, both a source of inefficiency in the
final code and the fundamental glue that pieces together different source
files into a complete program. Chapter 6 focuses on the implementation of
procedure calls. Chapter 7 then presents implementation strategies for most
other programming language constructs.

1.3.2 The Optimizer

When the front end emits IR for the input program, it handles the statements
one at a time, in the order that they are encountered. Thus, the initial IR
program contains general implementation strategies that will work in any
surrounding context that the compiler might generate. At runtime, the code



ABOUT ILOC
Throughout the book, low-level examples are written in an IR named
ILOC—an acronym derived from “intermediate language for an optimizing
compiler.” Over the years, ILOC has undergone many changes. Appendix A
describes ILOC in detail.

Think of ILOC as the assembly language for a simple RISC machine. It has a
standard set of operations. Most operations read their operands from
registers and write their results to registers. The memory operations, load
and store, transfer values between memory and registers. To simplify the
exposition in this book, most examples assume that all data consists of
integers.

Each operation has a set of operands and a set of results. The operation has
five parts: an opcode, a list of operands, a separator, a list of results, and an
optional comment. To store the sum of registers 1 and 2 into register 3, the
programmer might write

add
r1, r2
⇒
r3
// example instruction

The separator, ⇒, precedes the result list. It is a visual reminder that
information flows from left to right. It disambiguates cases where a person
reading the assembly-level text can easily confuse operands and targets.
(See loadAI and storeAI, for example.)

To facilitate the discussion in Chapter 7, ILOC has multiple ways to write a
conditional branch. It supports a Boolean compare and branch as well as a
more traditional condition code–based branch. In either case branches
always have labels for both the taken path and the “not-taken” path, which
makes all interblock transitions explicit. ILOC does not support a
“fall-through” case on a branch.

will execute in a more constrained and predictable context. The optimizer
can analyze the IR form of the code, discover facts about that context, and
use the resulting knowledge to rewrite the code so that it computes the same
answer in a more efficient way.

Efficiency can have many meanings. Classic code optimization tries to re-
Elapsed time
The elapsed time of a program refers to the
amount of time that it would require to run
standalone on a system.

duce the application’s elapsed running time. In other circumstances, the
optimizer might try to reduce the size of the compiled code, or the energy
that the processor consumes as the code runs. Compilers have targeted each
of these different notions of efficiency. Chapter 8 provides an introduction
to code optimization and looks at example techniques across a number of
different-sized code regions.



b ← ···
c ← ···
a ← 1

for i = 1 to n
read d
a ← a × 2 × b × c × d
end

b ← ···
c ← ···
a ← 1
t ← 2 × b × c

for i = 1 to n
read d
a ← a × d × t
end

(a) Original Code in Context
(b) Improved Code

■ FIGURE 1.3 Context Makes a Difference.

To make these ideas concrete, Fig. 1.3 shows our example assignment,
Loop invariant
A value that does not change between itera-
tions of a loop is said to be loop-invariant.
a ← a × 2 × b × c × d, embedded inside a simple loop. The assignment uses five
values: a, b, c, d, and 2. The loop updates a and d in every iteration. By
contrast, b, c, and 2 do not change as the loop executes; they are loop invari-
ant. If the optimizer can discover their invariance, it can rewrite the code
as shown in Fig. 1.3(b). In this version of the code, the number of multi-
plications has been reduced from 4n to 2n + 2. For n > 1, the rewritten loop
should execute faster.

Analysis

Most optimizations consist of an analysis and a transformation. The anal-
Data-flow analysis
a form of compile-time reasoning about the
runtime flow of values
ysis determines where the compiler can safely and profitably apply the
transformation. Compilers use several kinds of analysis to support trans-
formations. Data-flow analysis reasons, at compile time, about the flow of
values at runtime. Data-flow analyzers typically solve a system of simulta-
neous set equations based on facts derived from the IR form of the code.
Dependence analysis uses number-theoretic tests to reason about the rela-
tive independence of memory references. Compilers use it to disambiguate
array-element references. Chapter 9 explores data-flow analysis, along with
the translation into and out of static-single-assignment form, a widely used

IR that encodes information about the flow of both values and control di-
rectly in the IR.

Transformation

To improve the code, the compiler must go beyond analyzing it. The com-
piler must use the results of analysis to rewrite the code into a more efficient
form. Myriad transformations have been invented to improve the time or
space requirements of executable code. Some, such as the loop-invariant
code motion shown in Fig. 1.3(b), improve the running time of the pro-
gram. Others make the code more compact. Transformations vary in their



effect, the scope over which they operate, and the analysis required to sup-
port them. The literature on transformations is rich; the subject is large
enough and deep enough to merit one or more separate books. Chapter 10
explores scalar transformations—transformations intended to improve the
performance of code on a single processor. It presents a taxonomy for orga-
nizing the subject and populates that taxonomy with examples.

1.3.3 The Back End

The compiler’s back end traverses the IR and emits code for the target ma-
We distinguish carefully between an opera-
tion, a single atomic command executed by
one processor or functional unit, and an in-
struction, the set of one or more operations
that start to execute in the same cycle on a
processor.

chine. The back end solves at least three major problems.

■
It must convert the IR operations into equivalent operations in the tar-
get processor’s ISA, a process called instruction selection, which is the
subject of Chapter 11.

■
It must select an execution order for the operations, a process called
instruction scheduling, which is the subject of Chapter 12.

■
It must decide which values should reside in registers at each point in
the code, a process called register allocation, which is the subject of
Chapter 13.

Most compilers handle these three processes separately. These three distinct
but related processes are often lumped together in the term “code genera-
tion,” even though the instruction selector has the primary responsibility for
generating target-machine instructions.

Each of these three problems is, on its own, a computationally hard problem.
While it is not clear how to define optimal instruction selection, the prob-
lem of generating the fastest code sequence for a procedure on a given ISA
involves considering a huge number of alternatives. Instruction scheduling
is NP-complete for a basic block under most realistic execution models;
moving to larger regions of code does not simplify the problem. Register al-
location is, in its general form, also NP-complete in procedures with control
flow.

Instruction Selection

The first stage of code generation rewrites the IR operations into target ma-
t0 ← a × 2
t1 ← t0 × b
t2 ← t1 × c
t3 ← t2 × d
a
← t3

Low-level IR for
a ← a × 2 × b × c × d

chine operations, a process called instruction selection. Instruction selection
maps each IR operation, in its context, into one or more target machine oper-
ations. To illustrate the process, consider rewriting our example expression,

a ← a × 2 × b × c × d, into ILOC code. The low-level IR for the assignment
appears in the margin.



loadAI
rarp, @a ⇒ ra
// load ‘a’

loadI
2
⇒ r2
// constant 2 into r2
loadAI
rarp, @b
⇒ rb
// load ‘b’

loadAI
rarp, @c
⇒ rc
// load ‘c’

loadAI
rarp, @d
⇒ rd
// load ‘d’

mult
ra, r2
⇒ ra
// ra ← a × 2

mult
ra, rb
⇒ ra
// ra ← (a × 2) × b

mult
ra, rc
⇒ ra
// ra ← (a × 2 × b) × c

mult
ra, rd
⇒ ra
// ra ← (a × 2 × b × c) × d

storeAI
ra
⇒ rarp, @a
// write ra back to ‘a’

■ FIGURE 1.4 Example in ILOC.

Fig. 1.4 shows one ILOC sequence that the compiler might generate. It uses
rarp
the register designated to hold a pointer to
the current activation record

The local data area begins at a fixed offset
from the address in rarp.

just four ILOC operations:

ILOC Operation
Meaning

loadAI
r1,c2
⇒ r3
Memory (r1 + c2 ) → r3

loadI
c1
⇒ r2
c1 → r2

mult
r1,r2
⇒ r3
r1 × r2 → r3

storeAI
r1
⇒ r2,c3
r1 → Memory (r2 + c3)

The code assumes that a, b, c, and d are located at offsets @a, @b, @c, and

@d from the address contained in the register rarp. The code loads all of
the relevant values into registers, performs the multiplications in order, and
stores the result to the memory location for a.

The code assumes an unlimited supply of virtual registers. It names them
Virtual register
a symbolic register name that the compiler
uses to indicate a value that can be stored in
a register

with symbolic names such as ra to hold a and rarp to hold the address where
the data storage for our named values begins. The instruction selector re-
lies on the fact that the register allocator will map the virtual registers into
physical registers on the target machine.

The instruction selector can take advantage of special operations on the tar-
Physical register
a name that represents an actual register in
the target machine’s ISA
get machine. For example, if an immediate-multiply operation, multI, is
available, it might replace mult ra, r2 ⇒ ra with multI ra, 2 ⇒ ra, eliminating
the need for the operation loadI 2 ⇒ r2 and reducing the demand for regis-
ters by one. Alternatively, if addition is faster than multiplication, it might
simply replace the loadI – mult sequence with add ra, ra ⇒ ra, which should
be faster. Chapter 11 presents two techniques for instruction selection that
use pattern matching to choose efficient implementations for IR operations.



Register Allocation

During instruction selection, the compiler deliberately ignores the fact that
the target machine has a limited set of physical registers. Instead, it uses
virtual registers and assumes that “enough” registers exist. In practice, the
earlier stages of compilation may create demand for more physical registers
than the hardware provides. The register allocator must map those virtual
registers onto physical registers. Thus, the allocator must decide, at each
point in the code, which values will reside in physical registers. It then
rewrites the code to reflect its decisions. For example, a register allocator
might minimize register use by rewriting the code in our example as fol-
lows:

loadAI
rarp, @a ⇒ r1
// load ‘a’

add
r1, r1
⇒ r1
// r1 ← a × 2

loadAI
rarp, @b ⇒ r2
// load ‘b’

mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2) × b

loadAI
rarp, @c ⇒ r2
// load ‘c’

mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b) × c

loadAI
rarp, @d ⇒ r2
// load ‘d’

mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b × c) × d

storeAI
r1
⇒ rarp, @a
// write r1 back to ‘a’

This sequence uses three registers instead of six.

Minimizing register use may be counterproductive. If, for example, any of
the named values, a, b, c, or d, are already in registers, the code should
reference those registers directly. If all are in registers, the sequence could
be implemented so that it required no additional registers. Alternatively, if
some nearby expression also computed a × 2, it might be better to preserve
that value in a register rather than to recompute it later. This optimization
eliminates a later evaluation of a × 2, at the cost of an increase in demand for
registers.

To manage this kind of tradeoff, the register allocator analyzes the code to
Liveness
A value v is live at some point p if there
exists a path from p to a use of v along
which v is not redefined.

determine where each value, typically represented as a virtual register, is
live. The allocator’s goal is to keep each value in a register in the range of
code where that value is live. When that is not possible, it should choose
the set of enregistered values in a way that tries to minimize the runtime
cost introduced by keeping some of those values in memory. Chapter 13
explores the problems that arise in register allocation and the techniques
that compiler writers use to solve them.



Instruction Scheduling

To produce code that executes quickly, the code generator may need to
reorder operations to reflect the target machine’s specific performance con-
straints. The execution time of the different operations can vary. Memory
access operations can take tens or hundreds of cycles, while some arithmetic
operations, particularly multiplication and division, take several cycles. The
impact of these longer latency operations on the performance of compiled
code can be dramatic.

Assume, for the moment, that a loadAI or storeAI operation requires three
Elapsed time (again)
For a block of straight-line code, the
elapsed time is simply the total number
of processor cycles required to complete the
block, multiplied by the time per cycle.

cycles, a mult requires two cycles, and all other operations require one cy-
cle. The following table shows how the previous code fragment performs
under these assumptions. The Start column shows the cycle in which each
operation begins execution and the End column shows the cycle in which it
completes.

Start
End
Code

1
3
loadAI
rarp, @a
⇒ r1
// load ‘a’

4
4
add
r1, r1
⇒ r1
// r1 ← a × 2

5
7
loadAI
rarp, @b
⇒ r2
// load ‘b’

8
9
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2) × b

10
12
loadAI
rarp, @c
⇒ r2
// load ‘c’

13
14
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b) × c

15
17
loadAI
rarp, @d
⇒ r2
// load ‘d’

18
19
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b × c) × d

20
22
storeAI r1
⇒ rarp, @a
// write r1 back to ‘a’

This nine-operation sequence takes 22 cycles to execute. Minimizing regis-
ter use did not lead to rapid execution.

Many processors have the property that they can initiate new operations
while a long-latency operation executes. As long as the results of a long-
latency operation are not referenced until the operation completes, execution
proceeds normally. If, however, some intervening operation tries to read the
result of the long-latency operation prematurely, the processor delays the
operation that needs the value until the long-latency operation completes.
An operation cannot begin to execute until its operands are ready, and its
results are not ready until the operation terminates.

The instruction scheduler reorders the operations in the code. It attempts to
minimize the number of cycles wasted waiting for operands. Of course, the
scheduler must ensure that the new sequence produces the same result as



the original sequence. In many cases, the scheduler can drastically improve
the performance of “naive” code. A scheduler might produce the following
sequence for our example:

Start
End
Code

1
3
loadAI
rarp, @a ⇒ r1
// load ‘a’

2
4
loadAI
rarp, @b ⇒ r2
// load ‘b’

3
5
loadAI
rarp, @c ⇒ r3
// load ‘c’

4
4
add
r1, r1
⇒ r1
// r1 ← a × 2

5
6
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2) × b

6
8
loadAI
rarp, @d ⇒ r2
// load ‘d’

7
8
mult
r1, r3
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b) × c

9
10
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
// r1 ← (a × 2 × b × c) × d

11
13
storeAI r1
⇒ rarp, @a
// write r1 back to ‘a’

This version of the code requires just 13 cycles to execute. The code uses
one more register than the minimal number. It starts an operation in every
cycle except 8, 10, and 12. Other equivalent schedules are possible, as are
equal-length schedules that use more registers. Chapter 12 presents several
scheduling techniques that are widely used.

Interactions Among Code-Generation Components

Many of the truly hard problems that occur in compilation arise during code
generation. To make matters more complex, these problems interact. For
example, instruction scheduling moves load operations away from the op-
erations that use the newly loaded values. This can increase the period over
which the values are needed and, correspondingly, increase the demand for
registers in that interval in the code. Similarly, the assignment of particular
values to specific registers can constrain instruction scheduling by creating a
“false” dependence between two operations. (The second operation cannot
be scheduled until the first completes, even though the values in the com-
mon register are independent.) Renaming the values can often eliminate this
false dependence, at the potential cost of using more registers.

1.4 ENGINEERING

Compiler construction is an exercise in engineering—design and imple-
mentation under constraints. A typical compiler has a series of passes that,



together, translate code from some source language into some target lan-
guage. This structure creates a distinct separation of concerns. The parser
does not pay attention to the way registers are used and the register alloca-
tor does not worry about whether or not some constant “13” has a leading
zero. The pass structure of modern compilers simplifies implementation,
debugging, and maintenance.

A compiler uses dozens of algorithms and data structures. The compiler
writer must select, for each step in the translation, one or more efficient and
effective techniques. This design process involves tradeoffs in running time,
in implementation complexity, and in effectiveness. For any particular prob-
lem, the compiler writer can find multiple distinct solutions; each of them
will have its own strengths, weaknesses, costs, and benefits. The compiler
writer weaves together a set of solutions that, in concert, produce the desired
result.

A successful compiler executes an unimaginable number of times. Con-
sider the total number of times that the GCC compiler has run. Over GCC’s
lifetime, even small inefficiencies add up to a significant amount of time.
The savings from good design and implementation accumulate over time.
Thus, compiler writers must pay attention to compile time costs, such as
the asymptotic complexity of algorithms, the actual running time of the im-
plementation, and the space used by data structures. The compiler writer
should have in mind a budget for how much time the compiler will spend
on its various tasks.

The compiler’s front end should be fast. The theory-based techniques pre-
sented in Chapters 2 and 3 lead to scanners and parsers that operate in O(n)
time, where n is a measure of the size and structure of the input program.
By contrast, optimization and code generation address problems that require
more time. Solutions to many of these problems use algorithms with com-
plexities greater than O(n). Thus, algorithm choice in the optimizer and
back end has a larger impact on compile time than it does in the front
end. The compiler writer may need to trade precision of analysis and ef-
fectiveness of optimization against increases in compile time. Design and
implementation decisions should be made consciously and carefully.

JIT construction may be the ultimate feat of compiler engineering. Because
the system must recoup compile time through improved running time, the

JIT writer faces more extreme constraints than the author of a traditional
compiler. Chapter 14 explores the tradeoffs that arise in the design and im-
plementation of runtime optimizers.



1.5 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

Compiler construction is a complex task. A good compiler combines ideas
from formal language theory, from the study of algorithms, from artificial
intelligence, from systems design, from computer architecture, and from the
theory of programming languages and applies them to the problem of trans-
lating a program. A compiler brings together greedy algorithms, heuristic
techniques, graph algorithms, dynamic programming, automata, fixed-point
algorithms, synchronization and locality, allocation, and naming. Many of
the problems that confront the compiler are too hard or computationally in-
tensive for it to solve optimally; thus, compilers use approximations, heuris-
tics, and rules of thumb. As a result, compilers contain complex interactions
that can lead to surprising results—both good and bad.

To place this activity in an orderly framework and to provide for careful sep-
aration of concerns, most compilers are organized into three major phases:
a front end, an optimizer, and a back end. Each phase has a different set of
problems to tackle, and the approaches used to solve those problems differ,
too. The front end focuses on translating source code into some IR. Front
ends rely on results from formal language theory and type theory, with a
healthy dose of algorithms and data structures. The middle section, or op-
timizer, translates one IR program into another, with the goal of producing
an IR program that executes efficiently. Optimizers analyze programs to de-
rive knowledge about their runtime behavior and then use that knowledge
to transform the code and improve its behavior. The back end maps an IR
program to the instruction set of a specific processor. A back end approx-
imates the answers to hard problems in allocation and scheduling, and the
quality of its approximation has a direct impact on the speed and size of the
compiled code.

This book explores each of these phases. Chapters 2 and 3 describe the algo-
rithms used in a compiler’s front end. Chapter 4 provides an introduction to

IRs. Chapters 5 through 7 explore the implementation of various program-
The material in Chapters 5 through 7 is
heavily interrelated. We recommend that
you read all three chapters, then reread
them a second time.

ming language abstractions, including procedures and control structures,
along with the mechanisms used to create them in IR form. Chapter 8
provides an introduction to code optimization. Chapters 9 and 10 provide
a more detailed treatment of analysis and optimization for the interested
reader. Chapters 11 through 13 cover the techniques used by back ends for
instruction selection, scheduling, and register allocation. Finally, Chapter 14
describes how all of these techniques come together in modern runtime op-
timizers or just-in-time compilers.


ChapterNotes
25

CHAPTER NOTES

The first compilers appeared in the 1950s. These early systems showed sur-
prising sophistication. The original FORTRAN compiler was a multipass
system that included a distinct scanner, parser, and register allocator, along
with some optimizations [27,28]. The Alpha system, built by Ershov and
his colleagues, performed local optimization [150] and used graph coloring
to reduce the amount of memory needed for data items [151,152]. Early
ALGOL-60 efforts developed many critical ideas that still play important
roles in compiler implementation; see the January 1961 issue of Communi-
cations of the ACM (CACM) for examples [160,213,214,316].

Knuth provides some interesting recollections of compiler construction in
the early 1960s [238]. Randell and Russell describe early implementation
efforts for ALGOL-60 [303]. Allen describes the history of compiler de-
velopment inside IBM with an emphasis on the interplay of theory and
practice [15].

Many influential compilers were built in the 1960s and 1970s. These include
the classic optimizing compiler FORTRAN H [260,317], the Bliss-11 and
Bliss-32 compilers [79,368], and the portable BCPL compiler [308]. These
compilers produced high-quality code for a variety of CISC machines. Com-
pilers for students, on the other hand, focused on rapid compilation, good
diagnostic messages, and error correction [104,156].

The advent of RISC architecture in the 1980s led to another generation of
compilers; these focused on strong optimization and code generation [25,88,
96,215]. These compilers featured full-blown multipass optimizers. Modern
RISC compilers still follow this model.

During the 1990s, compiler-construction research focused on reacting to the
rapid changes taking place in microprocessor and system architecture. The
decade began with Intel’s i 860 processor challenging compiler writers to
manage pipelines and memory latencies directly. At its end, compilers con-
fronted challenges that ranged from multiple functional units to long mem-
ory latencies to parallel code generation. The structure and organization of
1980s RISC compilers proved flexible enough for these new challenges. Re-
searchers simply added new passes to their optimizers and code generators.

While JAVA systems use a mix of compilation and interpretation [69,288],
JAVA is not the first language to employ such a mix. LISP systems have
long included both native-code compilers and virtual-machine implemen-
tation schemes [275,336]. The SMALLTALK-80 system used a bytecode
distribution and a virtual machine [242]; several implementations added JIT
compilers [137].



In the post-2000 years, declines in the cost of computation let compiler
writers budget more cycles for analysis and transformation. This effect led
to the adoption of more powerful analyses for problems, including whole
program and library analysis [372], and widespread use of pointer anal-
ysis to disambiguate memory references [203]. Rising memory latencies
increased the importance of locality-improving and latency-hiding opti-
mizations [2,52,350].

EXERCISES

1.
A compiler writer faces many tradeoffs. What are the five qualities that
you, as a user, consider most important in a compiler that you purchase?
Does that list change when you are the compiler writer? What does your
list tell you about a compiler that you would implement?

2.
Consider a simple web browser that takes as input a textual string in
HTML format and displays the specified graphics on the screen. Is the
display process one of compilation or interpretation?

3.
Compilers are used in many different circumstances. What differences
might you expect in compilers designed for the following applications?

a.
A just-in-time compiler used to translate user interface code down-
loaded over a network

b.
A compiler that targets the embedded processor used in a mobile
device

c.
A compiler used in an introductory programming course at a high
school

d.
A compiler used to build wind-tunnel simulations that run on a
large cluster of identical processors

e.
A compiler that targets numerically intensive programs to a large
number of diverse machines




