Chapter4

Intermediate Representations

ABSTRACT
The central data structure in a compiler is its representation of the program
being compiled. Most passes in the compiler read and manipulate this inter-
mediate representation or IR. Thus, decisions about what to represent and
how to represent it play a crucial role in both the cost of compilation and
its effectiveness. This chapter presents a survey of IRs that compilers use,
including graphical IRs, linear IRs, and hybrids of these two forms, along
with the ancillary data structures that the compiler maintains, typified by its
symbol tables.

KEYWORDS
Intermediate Representation, Graphical IR, Linear IR, SSA Form, Symbol
Table, Memory Model, Storage Layout

4.1 INTRODUCTION

Compilers are typically organized as a series of passes. As the compiler de-
rives knowledge about the code it translates, it must record that knowledge
and convey it to subsequent passes. Thus, the compiler needs a represen-
tation for all of the facts that it derives about the program. We call this
collection of data structures an intermediate representation (IR). A compiler
may have one IR, or it may have a series of IRs that it uses as it translates
from the source code into the target language. The compiler relies on the

IR to represent the program; it does not refer back to the source text. The
properties of the IR have a direct effect on what the compiler can and cannot
do to the code.

Use of an IR lets the compiler make multiple passes over the code. The
compiler can generate more efficient code for the input program if it can
gather information in one pass and use it in another. However, this capa-
bility imposes a requirement: the IR must be able to represent the derived
information. Thus, compilers also build a variety of ancillary data structures
to represent derived information and provide efficient access to it. These
structures also form part of the IR.



Almost every phase of the compiler manipulates the program in its IR form.
Thus, the properties of the IR, such as the methods for reading and writing
specific fields, for finding specific facts, and for navigating around the pro-
gram, have a direct impact on the ease of writing the individual passes and
on the cost of executing those passes.

Conceptual Roadmap

This chapter focuses on the issues that surround the design and use of IRs in
compilation. Some compilers use trees and graphs to represent the program
being compiled. For example, parse trees easily capture the derivations built
by a parser and Lisp’s S-expressions are, themselves, simple graphs. Be-
cause most processors rely on a linear assembly language, compilers often
use linear IRs that resemble assembly code. Such a linear IR can expose
properties of the target machine’s native code that provide opportunities to
the compiler.

As the compiler builds up the IR form of the program, it discovers and de-
rives information that may not fit easily into a tree, graph, or linear IR. It
must understand the name space of the program and build ancillary struc-
tures to record that derived knowledge. It must create a plan for the layout
of storage so that the compiled code can store values into memory and re-
trieve them as needed. Finally, it needs efficient access, by name, to all of its
derived information. To accommodate these needs, compilers build a set of
ancillary structures that coexist with the tree, graph, or linear IR and form a
critical part of the compiler’s knowledge base about the program.

Overview

Modern multipass compilers use some form of IR to model the code being
analyzed, translated, and optimized. Most passes in the compiler consume

IR; the stream of categorized words produced by the scanner can be viewed
as an IR designed to communicate between the scanner and the parser. Most
passes in the compiler produce IR; passes in the code generator can be ex-
ceptions. Many modern compilers use multiple IRs during the course of a
single compilation. In a pass-structured compiler, the IR serves as the pri-
mary representation of the code.

A compiler’s IR must be expressive enough to record all of the useful facts
that the compiler might need to transmit between passes. Source code is
insufficient for this purpose; the compiler derives many facts that have no
representation in source code. Examples include the addresses of variables
or the register number in which a given parameter is passed. To record all of
the details that the compiler must encode, most compiler writers augment



the IR with tables and sets that record additional information. These struc-
tures form an integral part of the IR.

Selecting an appropriate IR for a compiler project requires an understanding
of the source language, the target machine, the goals for the compiler,
and the properties of the applications that the compiler will translate. For
example, a source-to-source translator might use a parse tree that closely re-
sembles the source code, while a compiler that produces assembly code for
a microcontroller might obtain better results with a low-level assembly-like

IR. Similarly, a compiler for C might need annotations about pointer values
that are irrelevant in a LISP compiler. Compilers for JAVA or C++ record
facts about the class hierarchy that have no counterpart in a C compiler.

Implementing an IR forces the compiler writer to focus on practical issues.
Common operations should be inexpensive.
Uncommon operations should be doable at
a reasonable cost.
The IR is the compiler’s central data structure. The compiler needs inexpen-
sive ways to perform the operations that it does frequently. It needs concise
ways to express the full range of constructs that might arise during compila-
tion. Finally, the compiler writer needs mechanisms that let humans examine
For example, ILOC’s ⇒ symbol has one
purpose: to improve readability.
the IR program easily and directly; self-interest should ensure that compiler
writers pay heed to this last point.

The remainder of this chapter explores the issues that arise in the design and
use of IRs. Section 4.2 provides a taxonomy of IRs and their properties. Sec-
tion 4.3 describes several IRs based on trees and graphs, while Section 4.4
presents several common linear forms of IRs. Section 4.5 provides a high-
level overview of symbol tables and their uses; Appendix B.4 delves into
some low-level hash-table implementation issues. The final two sections,
4.6 and 4.7, explore issues that arise from the way that the compiler names
values and the rules that the compiler applies to place values in memory.

A Few Words About Time

Intermediate representations are, almost entirely, a compile-time construct.
Thus, the compiler writer has control over the IR design choices, which she
makes at design time. The IR itself is instantiated, used, and discarded at
compile time.

Some of the ancillary information generated as part of the IR, such as
symbol tables and storage maps, is preserved for later tools, such as the
debugger. Those use cases, however, do not affect the design and imple-
mentation of the IR because that information must be translated into some
standard form dictated by the tools.



4.2 AN IR TAXONOMY

Compilers have used many kinds of IR. We will organize our discussion of
IRs along three axes: structural organization, level of abstraction, and mode
of use. In general, these three attributes are independent; most combinations
of organization, abstraction, and naming have been used in some compiler.

Structural Organization

Broadly speaking, IRs fall into three classes:

Graphical IRs
encode the compiler’s knowledge in a graph. Algorithms
then operate over nodes and edges. The parse trees used to depict deriva-
tions in Chapter 3 are an instance of a graphical IR, as are the trees shown
in panels (a) and (c) of Fig. 4.1.

Linear IRs
resemble pseudocode for some abstract machine. The algo-
rithms iterate over simple, linear sequences of operations. The ILOC code
used in this book is a form of linear IR, as are the representations shown
in panels (b) and (d) of Fig. 4.1.

Hybrid IRs
combine elements of both graphical and linear IRs, to capture
Compiler writers use the acronym CFG for
both context-free grammar and control-flow
graph. The difference should be clear from
context.

their strengths and avoid their weaknesses. A typical control-flow graph
(CFG) uses a linear IR to represent blocks of code and a graph to represent
the flow of control among those blocks.

The structural organization of an IR has a strong impact on how the compiler
writer thinks about analysis, optimization, and code generation. For exam-
ple, tree-structured IRs lead naturally to passes organized as some form of
treewalk. Similarly, linear IRs lead naturally to passes that iterate over the
operations in order.

Level of Abstraction

The compiler writer must also choose the level of detail that the IR will
expose: its level of abstraction. The IR can range from a near-source form
in which a couple of nodes represent an array access or a procedure call to a
low-level form in which multiple IR operations must be combined to form a
single target-machine operation. To illustrate the possibilities, the drawing
in the margin shows a reference to a[i,j] represented in a source-level tree.
Below it, the same reference is shown in ILOC. In both cases, a is a 10 × 10
array of 4-byte elements.

In the source-level tree, the compiler can easily recognize the computation
as an array reference, whereas the ILOC code obscures that fact fairly well.
In a compiler that tries to determine when two different references can touch



■ FIGURE 4.1 Different Representations for a ← b - 2 x c.

the same memory location, the source-level tree makes it easy to find and
compare references. By contrast, the ILOC code makes those tasks hard. On
the other hand, if the goal is to optimize the final code generated for the array
access, the ILOC code lets the compiler optimize details that remain implicit
in the source-level tree. For this purpose, a low-level IR may prove better.

Level of abstraction is independent of structure. Fig. 4.1 shows four differ-
ent representations for the statement a ← b - 2 x c. Panels (a) and (c) show
abstract syntax trees (ASTs) at both a near-source level and a near-machine
level of abstraction. Panels (b) and (d) show corresponding linear represen-
tations.

The low-level AST in panel (c) uses nodes that represent assembly-level
The translation of ◆ in the low-level linear
code depends on context. To the left of a ←
operator, it represents a store. To the right,
it represents a load.

concepts. A VAL node represents a value already in a register. A NUM node
represents a known constant that can fit in an operation’s immediate field.
A LAB node represents an assembly-level label. The dereference operator,
◆, treats the value as an address and represents a memory reference. This
particular AST will reappear in Chapter 11.

Level of abstraction matters because the compiler can, in general, only op-
timize details that the IR exposes. Facts that are implicit in the IR are hard



to change because the compiler treats implicit knowledge in uniform ways,
which mitigates against context-specific customization. For example, to op-
timize the code for an array reference, the compiler must rewrite the IR
for the reference. If the details of that reference are implicit, the compiler
cannot change them.

Mode of Use

The third axis relates to the way that the compiler uses an IR.

Definitive IR
A definitive IR is the primary representation for the code
being compiled. The compiler does not refer back to the source code;
instead, it analyzes, transforms, and translates one or more (successive)
IR versions of the code. These IRs are definitive IRs.

Derivative IR
A derivative IR is one that the compiler builds for a spe-
cific, temporary purpose. The derivative IR may augment the definitive
IR, as with a dependence graph for instruction scheduling (see Chap-
ter 12). The compiler may translate the code into and out of the derivative
IR to enable a specific optimization.

In general, if an IR is transmitted from one pass to another, it should be
considered definitive. If the IR is built within a pass for a specific purpose
and then discarded, it is derivative.

Naming

The compiler writer must also select a name space for the IR. This decision
will determine which values in the program are exposed to optimization. As
it translates the source code, the compiler must choose names and storage
locations for myriad distinct values.

Fig. 4.1 makes this concrete. In the ASTs, the names are implicit; the com-
piler can refer to any subtree in the AST by the node that roots the subtree.
Thus, the tree in panel (c) names many values that cannot be named in
panel (a), because of its lower level of abstraction. The same effect occurs
in the linear codes. The code in panel (b) creates just two values that other
operations can use while the code in panel (d) creates nine.

The naming scheme has a strong effect on how optimization can improve the
code. In panel (d), t0 is the runtime address of b, t4 is the runtime address of
c, and t8 is the runtime address of a. If nearby code references any of these
locations, optimization should recognize the identical references and reuse
the computed values (see Section 8.4.1). If the compiler reused the name t0
for another value, the computed address of b would be lost, because it could
not be named.



REPRESENTING STRINGS
The scanner classifies words in the input program into a small set of
categories. From a functional perspective, each word in the input stream
becomes a pair ⟨ lexeme, category ⟩, where lexeme is the word’s text and
category is its syntactic category.

For some categories, having both lexeme and category is redundant. The
categories +, ×, and for have only one lexeme. For others, such as identifiers,
numbers, and character strings, distinct words have distinct lexemes. For
these categories, the compiler will need to represent and compare the
lexemes.

Character strings are one of the least efficient ways that the compiler can
represent a name. The character string’s size is proportional to its length. To
compare two strings takes, in general, time proportional to their length.
A compiler can do better.

The compiler should, instead, map the names used in the original code into
a compact set of integers. This approach saves space; integers are denser
than character strings. This approach saves time; comparisons for equality
take O(1) time.

To accomplish this mapping, the compiler writer can have the scanner
create a hash table (see Appendix B.4) to hold all the distinct strings used in
the input program. Then the compiler can use either the string’s index in this
“string table” or a pointer to its record in the string table as a proxy for the
string. Information derived from the string, such as the length of a string
constant or the value and type of a numerical constant, can be computed
once and referenced quickly through the table.

Using too few names can undermine optimization. Using too many can bloat
some of the compile-time data structures and increase compile time without
benefit. Section 4.6 delves into these issues.

Practical Considerations

As a practical matter, the costs of generating and manipulating an IR should
concern the compiler writer, since they directly affect a compiler’s speed.
The data-space requirements of different IRs vary over a wide range. Since
the compiler typically touches all of the space that it allocates, data space
usually has a direct relationship to running time.

Last, and certainly not least, the compiler writer should consider the expres-
siveness of the IR—its ability to accommodate all the facts that the compiler
needs to record. The IR for a procedure might include the code that defines
it, the results of static analysis, profile data from previous executions, and



■ FIGURE 4.2 Parse Tree for a × 2 + a × 2 × b.

maps to let the debugger understand the code and its data. All of these facts
should be expressed in a way that makes clear their relationship to specific
points in the IR.

4.3 GRAPHICAL IRS

Many compilers use IRs that represent the underlying code as a graph.
While all the graphical IRs consist of nodes and edges, they differ in their
level of abstraction, in the relationship between the graph and the underlying
code, and in the structure of the graph.

4.3.1 Syntax-Related Trees

Parse trees, ASTs, and directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are all graphs used
to represent code. These tree-like IRs have a structure that corresponds to
the syntax of the source code.

Parse Trees

As we saw in Section 3.2, the parse tree is a graphical representation for the
derivation, or parse, of the input program. Fig. 4.2 shows the classic expres-
sion grammar alongside a parse tree for a × 2 + a × 2 × b. The parse tree is large
relative to the source text because it represents the complete derivation, with
a node for each grammar symbol in the derivation. Since the compiler must
allocate memory for each node and each edge, and it must traverse all those
nodes and edges during compilation, it is worth considering ways to shrink
this parse tree.



Minor transformations on the grammar, as described in Section 3.6.1, can
eliminate some of the steps in the derivation and their corresponding parse-
tree nodes. A more effective way to shrink the parse tree is to abstract away
those nodes that serve no real purpose in the rest of the compiler. This ap-
proach leads to a simplified version of the parse tree, called an abstract
syntax tree, discussed below.

Mode of Use:
Parse trees are used primarily in discussions of parsing, and
in attribute-grammar systems, where they are the definitive IR. In most other
applications in which a source-level tree is needed, compiler writers tend to
use one of the more concise alternatives, such as an AST or a DAG.

Abstract Syntax Trees

The abstract syntax tree (AST) retains the structure and meaning of the
Abstract syntax tree
a contraction of the parse tree that omits
nodes for most nonterminals
parse tree but eliminates extraneous nodes. It eliminates the nodes for non-
terminal symbols that encode the details of the derivation. An AST for

a × 2 + a × 2 × b is shown in the margin.

Mode of Use:
ASTs have been used as the definitive IR in many practical

compiler systems. The level of abstraction that those systems need varies
widely.

■
Source-to-source systems, including syntax-directed editors, code-
refactoring tools, and automatic parallelization systems, often use an

AST with near-source abstractions. The structure of a near-source AST
reflects the structure of the input program.

■
Compilers that generate assembly code may use an AST. These systems
typically start with a near-source AST and systematically lower the level
of abstraction until it is at or below the abstraction level of the target
machine’s ISA. The structure of that final, low-level AST tends to reflect
the flow of values between operations.

AST-based systems usually use treewalks to traverse the IR. Many of the al-
gorithms used in compilation have natural formulations as either a treewalk
(see Section 11.4) or a depth-first search (see Section 8.5.1).

Some compilers build ASTs as derivative IRs because conversion into and
out of an AST is fast and because it may simplify other algorithms. In par-
ticular, optimizations that rearrange expressions benefit from building an

AST as a derivative IR because the AST eliminates all of the explicit names
for intermediate results. Other algorithms, such as tree-height balancing
(Section 8.4.2) or tree-pattern matching (Section 11.4) have “natural” ex-
pressions as tree traversals.



CHOOSING THE RIGHT ABSTRACTION
Even with a source level tree, representation choices affect usability. For
example, the Rn Programming Environment used the subtree shown in
panel (a) below to represent a complex number in FORTRAN, which was
written as (c1,c2). This choice worked well for the syntax-directed editor, in
which the programmer was able to change c1 and c2 independently; the
pair node corresponded to the parentheses and the comma.

The pair format, however, proved problematic for the compiler. Each part of
the compiler that dealt with constants needed special-case code for
complex constants.

All other constants were represented with a single node that contained a
pointer to the constant’s lexeme, as shown above in panel (b). Using a similar
format for complex constants would have complicated the editor, but
simplified the compiler. Taken over the entire system, the benefits would
likely have outweighed the complications.

Directed Acyclic Graphs

While an AST is more concise than a parse tree, it faithfully retains the
Directed acyclic graph
A DAG is an AST that represents each
unique subtree once. DAGs are often called
ASTs with sharing.

structure of the original source code. For example, the AST for a × 2 + a × 2 × b
contains two distinct copies of the expression a × 2. A directed acyclic graph
(DAG) is a contraction of the AST that avoids this duplication. In a DAG,
nodes can have multiple parents, and identical subtrees are reused. Such
sharing makes the DAG more compact than the corresponding AST.

For expressions without assignment or function calls, textually identical ex-
pressions must produce identical values. The DAG for a × 2 + a × 2 × b, shown
in the margin, reflects this fact by sharing a single copy of a × 2. If the value
of a cannot change between the two uses of a, then the compiler should gen-
erate code to evaluate a × 2 once and use the result twice. This strategy can
reduce the cost of evaluation. The DAG explicitly encodes the redundancy
among subexpressions. If the compiler represents such facts in the IR, it can
avoid the costs of rediscovering them.

When building the DAG for this expression, the compiler must prove that
a’s value cannot change between uses. If the expression contains neither



STORAGE EFFICIENCY AND GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIONS
Many practical systems have used abstract syntax trees as their definitive IR.
Many of these systems found that the AST was large relative to the size of
the input text. In the Rn Programming Environment built at Rice in the
1980s, AST size posed two problems: mid-1980s workstations had limited
memory, and tree–I/O slowed down all of the Rn tools.

Rn AST nodes used 92 bytes. The IR averaged 11 nodes per source-
language statement. Thus, the AST needed about 1,000 bytes per statement.
On a 4MB workstation, this imposed a practical limit of about 1,000 lines of
code in most of the environment’s tools.

No single decision led to this problem. To simplify memory allocation,
Rn ASTs had only one kind of node. Thus, each node included all the fields
needed by any node. (Roughly half the nodes were leaves, which need no
pointers to children.) As the system grew, so did the nodes. New tools
needed new fields.

Careful attention can combat this kind of node bloat. In Rn, we built
programs to analyze the contents of the AST and how it was used. We
combined some fields and eliminated others. (In some cases, it was cheaper
to recompute information than to write it and read it.) We used hash-linking
to move rarely used fields out of the AST and into an ancillary table. (One bit
in the node-type field indicated the presence of ancillary facts related to the
node.) For disk I/O, we converted the AST to a linear form in a preorder
treewalk, which made pointers implicit.

In Rn, these changes reduced the size of ASTs in memory by about 75
percent. On disk, the files were about half the size of their memory
representation. These changes let Rn handle larger programs and made the
tools noticeably more responsive.

assignments nor calls to other procedures, the proof is easy. Since an as-

signment or a procedure call can change the value associated with a name,

the DAG construction algorithm must invalidate subtrees when the values of

their operands can change.

Mode of Use:
DAGs are used in real systems for two primary reasons.

If memory constraints limit the size of programs that the compiler can

process, using a DAG as the definitive IR can reduce the IR’s memory foot-

print. Other systems use DAGs to expose redundancies. Here, the benefit

lies in better compiled code. These latter systems tend to use the DAG as

a derivative IR—build the DAG, transform the definitive IR to reflect the

redundancies, and discard the DAG.



4.3.2 Graphs

While trees provide a natural representation for the grammatical structure
that parsing discovers in the source code, their rigid structure makes them
less useful for representing other properties of programs. To model these
aspects of program behavior, compilers often use more general graphs as
IRs. The DAG introduced in the previous section is one example of a graph.

Control-Flow Graph

The simplest unit of control flow is a basic block—a maximal length se-
Basic block
a maximal length sequence of branch-free
code
quence of straight-line, or branch-free, code. The operations in a block
always execute together, unless some operation raises an exception. A block
begins with a labeled operation and ends with a branch, jump, or predicated
operation. Control enters a basic block at its first operation. The operations
execute in an order consistent with top-to-bottom order in the block. Control
exits at the block’s last operation.

A control-flow graph (CFG) models the flow of control between the basic
Control-flow graph
A CFG has a node for each basic block
and an edge for each possible transfer of
control.

blocks in a procedure. A CFG is a directed graph, G = (N,E). Each node
n ∈ N corresponds to a basic block. Each edge e = (ni,nj) ∈ E corresponds
to a possible transfer of control from block ni to block nj.

To simplify the discussion of program analysis in Chapters 8 and 9, we as-
sume that each CFG has a unique entry node, n0, and a unique exit node, nf.
If a procedure has multiple entries, the compiler can create a unique n0 and
If the compiler adds artificial entry and exit
nodes, they may not correspond to actual
basic blocks.
add edges from n0 to each actual entry point. Similarly, nf corresponds to
the procedure’s exit. Multiple exits are more common than multiple entries,
but the compiler can easily add a unique nf and connect each of the actual
exits to it.

The CFG provides a graphical representation of the possible runtime
control-flow paths. It differs from syntax-oriented IRs, such as an AST,
which show grammatical structure. Consider the while loop shown below.
Its CFG is shown in the center pane and its AST in the rightmost pane.

The CFG captures the essence of the loop: it is a control-flow construct.
The cyclic edge runs from stmt1 back to the test at the head of the loop. By



contrast, the AST captures the syntax; it is acyclic but puts all the pieces in
place to regenerate the source-code for the loop.

For an if–then–else construct both the CFG and the AST would be acyclic,
as shown below.

Again, the CFG models the control flow; one of stmt1 or stmt2 executes,
but not both of them. The AST again captures the syntax but provides little
direct intuition about how the code actually executes. Any such connection
is implicit, rather than explicit.

Mode of Use:
Compilers typically use a CFG in conjunction with another
IR, making the CFG a derivative IR. The CFG represents the relationships
among blocks, while the operations inside a block are represented with an-
other IR, such as an expression-level AST, a DAG, or one of the linear IRs.
A compiler could treat such a hybrid IR as its definitive IR, but the complica-
tions of keeping the multiple forms consistent makes this practice unusual.

Many parts of the compiler rely on a CFG, either explicitly or implicitly.
Section 4.4.4 covers CFG construction.
Program analysis for optimization generally begins with control-flow anal-
ysis and CFG construction (see Chapter 9). Instruction schedulers need a
CFG to understand how the scheduled code for individual blocks flows to-
gether (see Chapter 12). Register allocation relies on a CFG to understand
how often each operation might execute and where to insert loads and stores
for spilled values (see Chapter 13).

Block Length

Some authors recommend building CFGs around blocks that are shorter
Single-statement blocks
a scheme where each block corresponds to
a single source-level statement
than a basic block. The most common alternative block is a single-statement
block. Single-statement blocks can simplify algorithms for analysis and op-
timization.

The tradeoff between a CFG built with single-statement blocks and one
built with maximal-length blocks involves both space and time. A CFG
built on single-statement blocks has more nodes and edges than one built
on maximal-length blocks. Thus, the single-statement CFG will use more
memory than the maximal-length CFG, other factors being equal. With more



■ FIGURE 4.3 An ILOC Basic Block and Its Dependence Graph.

nodes and edges, traversals take longer. More important, as the compiler an-
notates the CFG, the single-statement CFG has many more annotations than
does the basic-block CFG. The time and space spent to build and use these
annotations undoubtedly dwarfs the cost of CFG construction.

On the other hand, some optimizations benefit from single-statement blocks.
For example, lazy code motion (see Section 10.3.1) only inserts code at
block boundaries. Thus, single-statement blocks let lazy code motion op-
timize code placement at a finer granularity than would maximal-length
blocks.

Dependence Graph

Compilers also use graphs to encode the flow of values from the point where
Data-dependence graph
a graph that models the flow of values from
definitions to uses in a code fragment
a value is created, a definition, to any point where it is read, a use. A data-

Definition
An operation that creates a value is said to
define that value.

Use
An operation that references a value is
called a use of that value.

dependence graph embodies this relationship. Nodes in a data-dependence
graph represent operations. Most operations contain both definitions and
uses. An edge in a data-dependence graph connects two nodes, a definition
in one and a use in the other. We draw dependence graphs with edges that
run from the definition to the use; some authors draw these edges from the
use to the definition.

Fig. 4.3 shows ILOC code to compute a ← a × 2 × b × c × d, also shown in
Fig. 1.4. Panel (a) contains the ILOC code. Panel (b) shows the correspond-
ing data-dependence graph.

The dependence graph has a node for each operation in the block. Each edge
shows the flow of a single value. For example, the edge from 3 to 7 reflects
the definition of rb in statement 3 and its subsequent use in statement 7. The



■ FIGURE 4.4 Interaction Control Between Flow and the Dependence Graph.

virtual register rarp contains an address that is at a fixed distance from the
start of the local data area. Uses of rarp refer to its implicit definition at the
start of the procedure; they are shown with dashed lines.

The edges in the graph represent real constraints on the sequencing of
operations—a value cannot be used until it has been defined. The de-
pendence graph edges impose a partial order on execution. For exam-
ple, the graph requires that 1 and 2 precede 6. Nothing, however, re-
quires that 1 or 2 precedes 3. Many execution sequences preserve the
dependences shown in the graph, including ⟨1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10⟩ and
⟨2, 1, 6, 3, 7, 4, 8, 5, 9, 10⟩. The instruction scheduler exploits the freedom in
this partial order, as does an “out-of-order” processor.

At a more abstract level, consider the code fragment shown in Fig. 4.4(a),
which incorporates multiple basic blocks, along with both a while loop and
an if-then construct. The compiler can construct a single dependence graph
for the entire code fragment, as shown in panel (b).

References to y[i] derive their values from a single node that represents
all of the prior definitions of y. Without sophisticated analysis of the sub-
script expressions, the compiler cannot differentiate between references to
individual array elements.

This dependence graph is more complex than the previous example. Nodes
5 and 6 both depend on themselves; they use values that they may have
defined in a previous iteration. Node 6, for example, can take the value of
i from either 2 (in the initial iteration) or from itself (in any subsequent
iteration). Nodes 4 and 5 also have two distinct sources for the value of i:
nodes 2 and 6.

Mode of Use:
Data-dependence graphs are typically built for a specific
task and then discarded, making them a derivative IR. They play a cen-
tral role in instruction scheduling (Chapter 12). They find application in a



variety of optimizations, particularly transformations that reorder loops to
expose parallelism and to improve memory behavior. In more sophisticated
applications of the data-dependence graph, the compiler may perform ex-
tensive analysis of array subscript values to determine when references to
the same array can overlap.

Call Graph

To optimize code across procedure boundaries, some compilers perform
Interprocedural
Any technique that examines interactions
across more than one procedure is called
interprocedural.

Intraprocedural
Any technique that limits its attention to a
single procedure is called intraprocedural.

Call graph
a graph that represents the calling relation-
ships among the procedures in a program

The call graph has a node for each proce-
dure and an edge for each call site.

interprocedural analysis and optimization. To represent calls between pro-
cedures, compilers build a call graph. A call graph has a node for each
procedure and an edge for each distinct procedure call site. Thus, if the
code calls q from three textually distinct sites in p, the call graph has three
edges (p, q), one for each call site.

Both software-engineering practice and language features complicate the
construction of a call graph.

■
Separate compilation limits the compiler’s ability to build a call graph
because it limits the set of procedures that the compiler can see. Some
compilers build partial call graphs for the procedures in a compilation
unit and optimize that subset.

■
Procedure-valued parameters, both as actual parameters and as return
values, create ambiguous calls that complicate call-graph construction.
The compiler may perform an interprocedural analysis to limit the set of
edges that such a call induces in the call graph, making call graph con-
struction a process of iterative refinement. (This problem is analogous
to the issue of ambiguous branches in CFG construction, as discussed in
Section 4.4.4.)

■
In object-oriented programs, inheritance can create ambiguous proce-
Class hierarchy analysis
a static analysis that builds a model of a
program’s inheritance hierarchy
dure calls that can only be resolved with additional type information.
In some languages, class hierarchy analysis can disambiguate many of
these calls; in others, that information cannot be known until runtime.
Runtime resolution of ambiguous calls poses a serious problem for call
graph construction; it also adds significant runtime overhead to the am-
biguous calls.

Section 9.4 discusses some of the problems in call graph construction.

Mode of Use:
Call graphs almost always appear as a derivative IR, built
to support interprocedural analysis and optimization and then discarded. In
fact, the best known interprocedural transformation, inline substitution (see
Section 8.7.1), changes the call graph as it proceeds, rendering the old call
graph inaccurate.



SECTION REVIEW
Graphical IRs present an abstract view of the code being compiled. The
level of abstraction in a graphical IR, such as an AST, can vary from source
level to below machine level. Graphical IRs can serve as definitive IRs or be
built as special-purpose derivative IRs.

Because they are graphs, these IRs encode relationships that may be
difficult to represent or manipulate in a linear IR. Graph traversals are an
efficient way to move between logically connected points in the program;
most linear IRs lack this kind of cross-operation connectivity.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Given an input program, compare the expected size of the IR as a func-
tion of the number of tokens returned by the scanner for (a) a parse
tree, (b) an AST, and (c) a DAG. Assume that the nodes in all three IR
forms are of a uniform and fixed size.

2.
How does the number of edges in a dependence graph for a basic block
grow as a function of the number of operations in the block?

4.4 LINEAR IRS

Linear IRs represent the program as an ordered series of operations. They
are an alternative to the graphical IRs described in the previous section.
An assembly-language program is a form of linear code. It consists of an
ordered sequence of instructions. An instruction may contain more than one
operation; if so, those operations execute in parallel. The linear IRs used in
compilers often resemble the assembly code for an abstract machine.

The logic behind using a linear form is simple. The source code that serves
as input to the compiler is a linear form, as is the target-machine code that
it emits. Several early compilers used linear IRs; this was a natural notation
for their authors, since they had previously programmed in assembly code.

Linear IRs impose a total order on the sequence of operations. In Fig. 4.3,
contrast the ILOC code with the data-dependence graph. The ILOC code
has an implicit total order; the dependence graph imposes a partial order
that allows multiple execution orders.

If a linear IR is used as the definitive IR in a compiler, it must include
a mechanism to encode transfers of control among points in the program.
Control flow in a linear IR usually models the implementation of control



flow on the target machine. Thus, linear codes usually include both jumps
and conditional branches. Control flow demarcates the basic blocks in a
linear IR; blocks end at branches, at jumps, or just before labeled operations.

Branches in ILOC differ from those found in a typical assembly language.
Taken branch
In most ISAs, conditional branches use
only one label. Control flows either to the
label, called the taken branch, or to the
operation that follows the label, called the
fall-through branch.

The fall-through path is often faster than the
taken path.

They explicitly specify a label for both the taken path and the fall-through
path. This feature eliminates all fall-through transfers of control and makes
it easier to find basic blocks, to reorder basic blocks, and to build a CFG.

Many kinds of linear IRs have been used in compilers.

■
One-address codes model the behavior of accumulator machines and
stack machines. These codes expose the machine’s use of implicit names
so that the compiler can tailor the code for it. The resulting IR can be
quite compact.

■
Two-address codes model a machine that has destructive operations.
Destructive operation
an operation in which one of the operands
is always redefined with the result

These operations likely arose as a way to
save space in the instruction format on 8- or
16-bit machines.

These codes fell into disuse as destructive operations and memory con-
straints on IR size became less important; a three-address code can
model destructive operations explicitly.

■
Three-address codes model a machine where most operations take two
operands and produce a result. The rise of RISC architectures in the
1980s and 1990s made these codes popular again.

The rest of this section describes two linear IRs that are in common use:
stack-machine code and three-address code. Stack-machine code offers a
compact, storage-efficient representation. In applications where IR size mat-
ters, such as a JAVA applet transmitted over a network before execution,
stack-machine code makes sense. Three-address code models the instruction
format of a modern RISC machine; it has distinct names for two operands
and a result. You are already familiar with one three-address code: the ILOC
used throughout this book.

4.4.1 Stack-Machine Code

Stack-machine code, a form of one-address code, assumes the presence of a
stack of operands. It is easy to generate and to understand. Most operations
read their operands from the stack and push their results onto the stack. For
example, a subtract operator removes the top two stack elements and pushes
their difference onto the stack.

The stack discipline creates a need for new operations: push copies a value
from memory onto the stack, pop removes the top element of the stack and
writes it to memory, and swap exchanges the top two stack elements. Stack-
based processors have been built; the IR seems to have appeared as a model



for those ISAs. Stack-machine code for the expression a - 2 × b appears in
the margin.

Stack-machine code is compact. The stack creates an implicit name space

push
b

push
2

multiply

push
a

subtract

Stack Machine Code for a - 2 × b

and eliminates many names from the IR, which shrinks the IR. Using the
stack, however, means that all results and arguments are transitory, unless
the code explicitly moves them to memory.

Mode of Use:
Stack-machine code is typically used as a definitive
Bytecode
an IR designed specifically for its compact
form; typically code for an abstract stack
machine

The name derives from its limited size;
many operations, such as multiply, need
only a single byte.

IR—often as the IR to transmit code between systems and environments.
Both SMALLTALK-80 and JAVA use bytecode, the ISA of a stack-based
virtual machine, as the external, interpretable form for code. The bytecode
either runs in an interpreter, such as the JAVA virtual machine, or is trans-
lated into native target-machine code before execution. This design creates
a system with a compact form of the program for distribution and a simple
scheme for porting the language to a new machine: implement an interpreter
for the virtual machine.

4.4.2 Three-Address Code

In three-address code, most operations have the form i ← j op k, with an
t1 ← 2

t2 ← b

t3 ← t1 × t2
t4 ← a

t5 ← t4 - t3

Three-Address Code for a - 2 × b

operator (op), two operands (j and k), and one result (i). Some operators,
such as an immediate load and a jump, use fewer arguments. Sometimes, an
operation has more than three addresses, such as a floating-point multiply-
add operation. Three-address code for a - 2 × b appears in the margin. ILOC
is a three-address code.

Three-address code is attractive for several reasons. First, it is reasonably
compact. Most operations consist of four items: an operation code, or op-
code, and three names. The opcode and the names are drawn from lim-
ited sets. Opcodes typically require one or two bytes. Names are typically
represented by integers or table indices. Second, separate names for the
operands and the result give the compiler freedom to specify and control
the reuse of names and values; three-address code has no destructive op-
erations. Three-address code introduces a new set of compiler-generated
names—names that hold the results of the various operations. A carefully
chosen name space can reveal new opportunities to improve the code. Fi-
nally, since many modern processors implement three-address operations,
a three-address code models their properties well.

Level of Abstraction:
Within three-address codes, the set of supported op-
erators and the level of abstraction can vary widely. Often, a three-address

IR will contain mostly low-level operations, such as jumps, branches, loads,
and stores, alongside more complex operations that encapsulate control



flow, such as max. Representing these complex operations directly simpli-
fies analysis and optimization.

For example, consider an operation that copies a string of characters from
one address, the source, to another, the destination. This operation appeared
as the bcopy library routine in the 4.2 BSD UNIX distribution and as the
mvcl instruction (move character long) in the IBM 370 ISA. On a machine
that does not implement an operation similar to mvcl, it may take many
operations to perform such a copy.

Adding mvcl to the three-address code lets the compiler compactly repre-
sent this complex operation. The compiler can analyze, optimize, and move
the operation without concern for its internal workings. If the hardware sup-
IBM’s PL.8 compiler, a pioneering RISC
compiler, used this strategy.
ports an mvcl-like operation, then code generation will map the IR construct
directly to the hardware operation. If the hardware does not, then the com-
piler can translate mvcl into a sequence of lower-level IR operations or a call
to a bcopy-like routine before final optimization and code generation.

Mode of Use:
Compilers that use three-address codes typically deploy
them as a definitive IR. Three-address code, with its explicit name space
and its load-store memory model, is particularly well suited to optimization
for register-to-register, load-store machines.

4.4.3 Representing Linear Codes

Many data structures have been used to implement linear IRs. The choices
that a compiler writer makes affect the costs of various operations on IR
code. Since a compiler spends most of its time manipulating the IR form of
the code, these costs deserve some attention. While this discussion focuses
on three-address codes, most of the points apply equally to stack-machine
code (or any other linear form).

Three-address codes are often implemented as a set of quadruples. Each
quadruple is represented with four fields: an operator, two operands (or
sources), and a destination. To form blocks, the compiler needs a mecha-
nism to connect individual quadruples. Compilers implement quadruples in
a variety of ways.

Fig. 4.5 shows three schemes to represent three-address code for a - 2 × b
t1 ← 2

t2 ← b

t3 ← t1 × t2
t4 ← a

t5 ← t4 - t3

Three-Address Code for a - 2 × b

(shown in the margin). The first scheme, in panel (a), uses an array of struc-
tures. The compiler might build such an array for each CFG node to hold
the code for the corresponding block. In panel (b), a vector of pointers holds
the block’s quadruples. Panel (c) links the quadruples together into a list.

Consider the costs incurred to rearrange the code in this block. The first
operation loads a constant into a register; on most machines this translates



■ FIGURE 4.5 Implementations of Three-Address Code for a - 2 × b.

directly into a load immediate operation. The second and fourth operations
load values from memory, which on most machines might incur a multicycle
delay unless the values are already in the primary cache. To hide some of
the delay, the instruction scheduler might move the loads of b and a in front
of the load immediate of 2.

In the array of structures, moving the load of b ahead of the immediate load
requires saving the first operation to a temporary location, shuffling the sec-
ond operation upward, and moving the immediate load into the second slot.
The vector of pointers requires the same three-step approach, except that
only the pointer values must be changed. The compiler can save the pointer
to the immediate load, copy the pointer to the load of b into the first vector
element, and rewrite the second vector element with the saved pointer. For
the linked list, the operations are similar, except that the compiler must save
enough state to let it traverse the list.

Now, consider what happens in the front end when it generates the initial
round of IR. With the array of structures and the vector of pointers, the com-
piler must select a size for the array—in effect, the number of quadruples
that it expects in a block. As it generates the quadruples, it fills in the data
structure. If the compiler allocated too much space, that space is wasted. If
it allocated too little, the compiler must allocate space for a larger array or
vector, copy the contents into this new place, and free the original space. The
linked list avoids these problems. Expanding the list just requires allocating
a new quadruple and setting the appropriate pointer in the list.

A multipass compiler may use different implementations to represent the

IR at different points in the compilation process. In the front end, where
the focus is on generating the IR, a linked list might both simplify the im-
plementation and reduce the overall cost. In an instruction scheduler, with
its focus on rearranging the operations, the array of pointers might make
more sense. A common interface can hide the underlying implementation
differences.



INTERMEDIATE REPRESENTATIONS IN ACTUAL USE
In practice, compilers use a variety of IRs. Legendary FORTRAN compilers of
yore, such as IBM’s FORTRAN H compilers, used a combination of quadruples
and control-flow graphs to represent the code for optimization. Since
FORTRAN H was written in FORTRAN, it held the IR in an array.

For years, GCC relied on a very low-level IR, called register transfer language
(RTL). GCC has since moved to a series of IRs. The parsers initially produce a
language-specific, near-source tree. The compiler then lowers that tree to a
second IR, GIMPLE, which includes a language-independent tree-like
structure for control-flow constructs and three-address code for expressions
and assignments. Much of GCC’s optimizer uses GIMPLE; for example, GCC
builds static single-assignment form (SSA) on top of GIMPLE. Ultimately, GCC
translates GIMPLE into RTL for final optimization and code generation.

The LLVM compiler uses a single low-level IR; in fact, the name LLVM stands
for “low-level virtual machine.” LLVM’s IR is a linear three-address code. The IR
is fully typed and has explicit support for array and structure addresses. It
provides support for vector or SIMD data and operations. Scalar values are
maintained in SSA form until the code reaches the compiler’s back end. In
LLVM environments that use GCC front ends, LLVM IR is produced by a pass
that performs GIMPLE-to-LLVM translation.

The Open64 compiler, an open-source compiler for the IA-64 architecture,
used a family of five related IRs, called WHIRL. The parser produced a
near-source-level WHIRL. Subsequent phases of the compiler introduced
more detail to the WHIRL code, lowering the level of abstraction toward the
actual machine code. This scheme let the compiler tailor the level of
abstraction to the various optimizations that it applied to IR.

Notice that some information is missing from Fig. 4.5. For example, no
labels are shown because labels are a property of the block rather than any
individual quadruple. Storing a list of labels with the CFG node for the block
saves space in each quadruple; it also makes explicit the property that labels
occur only at the start of a block. With labels attached to a block, the com-
piler can ignore them when reordering operations inside the block, avoiding
one more complication.

4.4.4 Building the CFG from Linear Code

Compilers often must convert between different IRs, often different styles
of IRs. One routine conversion is to build a CFG from a linear IR such as

ILOC. The essential features of a CFG are that it identifies the beginning and
end of each basic block and connects the resulting blocks with edges that



FindLeaders()
next ← 1
Leader[next++] ← 1
create a CFG node for l1

for i ← 2 to n do
if opi has a label li then
Leader[next++] ← i
create a CFG node for li

// MaxStmt is a global variable
MaxStmt ← next - 1

BuildGraph()
for i ← 1 to MaxStmt do
j ← Leader[i] + 1
while ( j ≤ n and opj /∈ Leader) do
j ← j + 1

j ← j - 1
Last[i] ← j

if opj is "cbr rk → l1, l2" then

add edge from j to node for l1
add edge from j to node for l2

else if opj is "jumpI → l1" then

add edge from j to node for l1

else if opj is "jump → r1" then

add edges from j to all labeled
statements
end

(a) Finding Leaders
(b) Finding Last and Adding Edges

■ FIGURE 4.6 Building a Control-Flow Graph.

describe the possible transfers of control among blocks. Often, the compiler
must build a CFG from a simple, linear IR that represents a procedure.

As a first step, the compiler must find the start and the end of each basic
block in the linear IR. We will call the initial operation of a block a leader.
An operation is a leader if it is the first operation in the procedure, or if it
has a label that is, potentially, the target of some branch. The compiler can
identify leaders in a single pass over the IR, shown in Fig. 4.6(a). FindLeaders
iterates over the operations in the code, in order, finds the labeled statements,
and records them as leaders.

If the linear IR contains labels that are not used as branch targets, then treat-
Ambiguous jump
a branch or jump whose target is not known
at compile time (e.g., a jump to an address
in a register)

In ILOC, jump is ambiguous while jumpI is
not.

ing labels as leaders may unnecessarily split blocks. The algorithm could
track which labels are jump targets. However, ambiguous jumps may force
it to treat all labeled statements as leaders.

The second pass, shown in panel (b), finds every block-ending operation.
It assumes the ILOC model where every block, except the final block, ends
with a branch or a jump and branches specify labels for both the taken and
not-taken paths. This assumption simplifies the handling of blocks and al-
lows the compiler’s optimizer or back end to choose which path will be the
CFG construction with fall-through
branches is left as an exercise for the reader
(see Exercise 4).
“fall through” case of a branch. (For the moment, assume branches have no
delay slots.)



To find the end of each block, the algorithm iterates through the blocks, in
order of their appearance in the Leader array. It walks forward through the IR
until it finds the leader of the next block. The operation immediately before
that leader ends the current block. The algorithm records that operation’s
index in Last[i], so that the pair ⟨ Leader[i], Last[i] ⟩ describes block i. It adds
edges to the CFG as needed.

For a variety of reasons, the CFG should have a unique entry node n0 and
a unique exit node nf. If the underlying code does not have this shape, a
simple postpass over the graph can create n0 and nf.

Complications in CFG Construction

Features of the IR, the target machine, and the source language can compli-
cate CFG construction.

Ambiguous jumps may force the compiler to add edges that are not feasi-
Pseudooperation
an operation that manipulates the internal
state of the assembler or compiler, but does
not translate into an executable operation

ble at runtime. The compiler writer can improve this situation by recording
the potential targets of ambiguous jumps in the IR. ILOC includes the tbl
pseudooperation to specify possible targets of an ambiguous jump (see Ap-
pendix A). Anytime the compiler generates a jump, it should follow the jump
with one or more tbl operations that record the possible targets. The hints
reduce spurious edges during CFG construction.

If a tool builds a CFG from target-machine code, features of the target
PC-relative branch
A transfer of control that specifies an offset,
either positive or negative, from its own
memory address.

ISA can complicate the process. The algorithm in Fig. 4.6 assumes that all
leaders, except the first, are labeled. If the target machine has fall-through
branches, the algorithm must be extended to recognize unlabeled statements
that receive control on a fall-through path. PC-relative branches cause a sim-
ilar set of complications.

Branch delay slots introduce complications. The compiler must group any
operation in a delay slot into the block that preceded the branch or jump. If
that operation has a label, it is a member of multiple blocks. To disambiguate
such an operation, the compiler can place an unlabeled copy of the operation
in the delay slot and use the labeled operation to start the new block.

If a branch or jump can occur in a branch delay slot, the CFG builder must
walk forward from the leader to find the block-ending branch—the first
branch it encounters. Branches in the delay slot of a block-ending branch
can be pending on entry to the target block. In effect, they can split the tar-
get block into multiple blocks and create both new blocks and new edges.
This feature adds serious complications to CFG construction.

Some languages allow jumps to labels outside the current procedure. In the
procedure that contains the jump, the jump target can be modeled with a new



block. In the procedure that contains the target, however, the labeled block
can pose a problem. The compiler must know that the label is the target of a
nonlocal jump; otherwise, analysis passes may produce misleading results.
For this reason, languages such as PASCAL or ALGOL restricted nonlocal
jumps to visible labels in outer lexical scopes. C requires the use of the
functions setjmp and longjmp to expose these transfers.

SECTION REVIEW
Linear IRs represent the code being compiled as an ordered sequence of
operations. Linear IRs vary in their level of abstraction; the source code for a
program in a text file is a linear form, as is the assembly code for that same
program. Linear IRs lend themselves to compact, human-readable
representations.

Two widely used linear IRs are bytecodes, generally implemented as a
one-address code with implicit names on many operations, and
three-address code, similar to ILOC.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Consider the expression a × 2 + a × 2 × b. Translate it into stack-machine
code and into three address code. Compare and contrast the total num-
ber of operations and operands in each form. How do they compare to
the tree in Fig. 4.2(b)?

2.
Sketch the modifications that must be made to the algorithm in
Fig. 4.6 to account for ambiguous jumps and branches. If all jumps and
branches are labeled with a construct similar to ILOC’s tbl, does that
simplify your algorithm?

4.5 SYMBOL TABLES

During parsing the compiler discovers the names and properties of many
Symbol table
a collection of one or more data structures
that hold information about names and
values

Most compilers maintain symbol tables as
persistent ancillary data structures used in
conjunction with the IR that represents the
executable code.

distinct entities, including named values, such as variables, arrays, records,
structures, strings, and objects; class definitions; constants; labels in the
code; and compiler-generated temporary values (see the digression on
page 192).

For each name actually used in the program, the compiler needs a variety
of information before it can generate code to manipulate that entity. The
specific information will vary with the kind of entity. For a simple scalar
variable the compiler might need a data type, size, and storage location. For



a function it might need the type and size of each parameter, the type and
size of the return value, and the relocatable assembly-language label of the
function’s entry point.

Thus, the compiler typically creates one or more repositories to store de-
scriptive information, along with an efficient way to locate the information
associated with a given name. Efficiency is critical because the compiler
will consult these repositories many times.

The compiler typically keeps a set of tables, often referred to as symbol
tables. Conceptually, a symbol table has two principal components: a map
from textual name to an index in a repository and a repository where that
index leads to the name’s properties. An abstract view of such a table is
shown in the margin.

A compiler may use multiple tables to represent different kinds of informa-
tion about different kinds of values. For names, it will need a symbol table
that maps each name to its properties, declared or implicit. For aggregates,
such as records, arrays, and objects, the compiler will need a structure table
that records the entity’s layout: its constituent members or fields, their prop-
erties, and their relative location within the structure. For literal constants,
such as numbers, characters, and strings, the compiler will need to lay out
Constant pool
a statically initialized data area set aside for
constant values
a data area to hold these values, often called a constant pool. It will need a
map from each literal constant to both its type and its offset in the pool.

4.5.1 Name Resolution

The primary purpose of a symbol table is to resolve names. If the compiler
finds a reference to name n at some point p in a program, it needs a mech-
anism that maps n back to its declaration in the naming environment that
holds at p. The map from name to declaration and properties must be well
defined; otherwise, a program might have multiple meanings. Thus, pro-
gramming languages introduce rules that specify where a given declaration
of a name is both valid and visible.

In general, a scope is a contiguous set of statements in which a name is de-
Scope
the region of a program where a given name
can be accessed
clared, visible, and accessible. The limits of a scope are marked by specific
symbols in the language. Typically, a new procedure defines a new scope
that covers its entire definition. C and C++ demarcate blocks with curly
braces. Each block defines a new scope.

In most languages, scopes can nest. A declaration for x in an inner scope
obscures any definitions of x in surrounding scopes. Nesting creates a hi-
erarchy of name spaces. These hierarchies play a critical role in software



REPRESENTING REFERENCES IN THE IR
In the implementation of an IR, the compiler writer must decide how to
represent a reference to a source language name. The compiler could simply
record the lexeme; that decision, however, will require a symbol-table
lookup each time that the compiler uses the reference.

The best alternative may be to store a handle to the relevant symbol table
reference. That handle could be an absolute pointer to the table entry; it
might be a pointer to the table and an offset within the table. Such a handle
will allow direct access to the symbol table information; it should also enable
inexpensive equality tests.

engineering; they allow the programmer to choose local names without con-
cern for their use elsewhere in the program.

The two most common name-space hierarchies are created by lexical scope
rules and inheritance rules. The compiler must build tables to model each of
these hierarchies.

Lexical Scopes

A lexical-scoping environment uses properly nested regions of code as
scopes. A name n declared in scope s is visible inside s. It is visible inside
any scope nested in s, with the caveat that a new declaration of n obscures
any declaration of n from an outer scope.

At a point p in the code, a reference to n maps to the first declaration of n
Global scope
an outer scope for names visible in the
entire program
found by traversing the scopes from the scope containing the reference all
the way out to the global scope. Lexically scoped languages differ greatly in
the depth of nesting that they allow and the set of scopes that they provide.
(Sections 5.4.1, 6.3.1, and 6.4.3 discuss lexical scopes in greater depth.)

Inheritance Hierarchies

Object-oriented languages (OOLs) introduce another set of scopes: the in-
Superclass and Subclass
In a language with inheritance, if class x
inherits members and properties from class
y, we say that x is a subclass of y and y is
the superclass of x.

The terminology used to specify inheri-
tance varies across languages. In JAVA,
a subclass extends its superclass. In C++,
a subclass is derived from its superclass.

heritance hierarchy. OOLs create a data-centric naming scheme for objects;
objects have data and code members that are accessed relative to the object
rather than relative to the current procedure.

In an OOL, explicitly declared subclass and superclass relationships define
the inheritance hierarchy—a naming regime similar to the lexical hierarchy
and orthogonal to it. Conceptually, subclasses nest within superclasses, just
as inner scopes nest within outer scopes in a lexical hierarchy. The compiler
builds tables to model subclass and superclass relationships, as well.



Hierarchical Tables

The compiler can link together tables, built for individual scopes, to repre-
sent the naming hierarchies in any specific input program. A typical program
in an Algol-like language (ALL) might have a single linked set of tables
to represent the lexically nested scopes. In an OOL, that lexical hierarchy
would be accompanied by another linked set of tables to represent the in-
heritance hierarchy.

When the compiler encounters a reference in the code, it first decides
whether the name refers to a variable (either global or local to some method)
or an object member. That determination is usually a matter of syntax; lan-
guages differentiate between variable references and object references. For
a variable reference, it begins in the table for the current scope and searches
upward until it finds the reference. For an object member, it determines the
object’s class and begins a search through the inheritance hierarchy.

In a method m, declared in some class c, the search environment might look
as follows. We refer to this scheme as the “sheaf of tables.”

The lookup begins in the table for the appropriate scope and works its way
up the chain of tables until it either finds the name or exhausts the chain.
Chaining tables together in this fashion creates a flexible and powerful tool
to model the complex scoping environments of a modern programming lan-
guage.

The compiler writer can model complex scope hierarchies—both lexical hi-
erarchies and inheritance hierarchies—with multiple tables linked together
in a way that reflects the language-designated search order. For example,
nested classes in JAVA give rise to a lexical hierarchy within the inheritance
hierarchy. The link order may vary between languages, but the underlying
technology need not change.

In a modern environment, the compiler will likely retain each of these tables
for later use, either in the compiler or in related tools such as performance
monitors or debuggers. The sheaf-of-tables approach can create compact,
separable tables suitable for preservation.



Other Scopes

Other language features create nested scopes. For example, records, struc-
tures, and objects all act as independent scopes. Each creates a new name
space and has a set of visibility rules. The compiler may or may not choose
to implement these scopes with a full-blown sheaf in a hash table; nonethe-
less each is a distinct scope and can be modeled with a new sheaf in the
appropriate table. The constant pool might also be treated as a separate
scope.

4.5.2 Table Implementation

As we have seen, a compiler will contain multiple distinct tables, ranging
from symbol tables and inheritance tables through structure layout tables
and constant tables. For each table, the compiler writer must choose an
appropriate implementation strategy: both a mapping function and a repos-
itory. While the choices are, for the most part, independent, the compiler
writer may want to use the same basic strategies across multiple tables so
that they can share implementations.

Implementing the Mapping

The mapping from a textual name to an index can be implemented in myriad
ways, each with their own advantages and disadvantages.

Linear List

A linear list is simple to construct, to expand, and to search. The primary
disadvantage of a linear list is that searching the list takes O(n) time per
lookup, where n is the number of items in the list. Still, for a small proce-
dure, a linear list might make sense.

Tree

A tree structure has the advantages of a list, including simple and efficient
expansion. It also has the potential to significantly reduce the time required
per lookup. Assuming that the tree is roughly balanced—that is, the sub-
trees at each level are approximately the same size—then the expected case
lookup time should approach O(log2 n) per item, where n is the number of
items in the tree.

Balanced trees use more complex insertion and deletion protocols to main-
tain roughly equal-sized subtrees. The literature contains many effective and
efficient techniques for building balanced trees.



Unbalanced trees have simpler insertion and deletion protocols but provide
no guarantees on the relative sizes of sibling subtrees. An unbalanced tree
can devolve into linear search when presented with an adversarial input.

Hash Map

The compiler can use a numerical computation, called a hash, to produce
Hash collision
When two strings map to the same table
index, we say that they collide. For hash
function h(x) and table size s, if

h(x) mod s = h(y) mod s,

then x and y will collide.

an integer from a string. A well-designed hash function, h, distributes those
integers so that few strings produce the same hash value. To build a hash
table, the programmer uses the hash value of a string, modulo the table size,
as an index into a table.

Handling collisions is a key issue in hash table design, as discussed in Ap-
pendix B.4. If the set of keys produces no collisions, then insertion and
lookup in a hash table should take O(1) time. If the set of keys all map to
the same table index, then insertion and lookup might devolve to O(|keys|)
time per lookup. To avoid this problem, the compiler writer should use a
well-designed hash function, as found in a good algorithms textbook.

Static Map

As an alternative to hashing, the compiler can precompute a collision-free
static map from keys to indices. Multiset discrimination solves this problem
(see the digression on page 190).

For small sets of keys, an approach that treats the keys as a set of acyclic
regular expressions and incrementally builds a DFA to recognize that set can
lead to a fast implementation (see Section 2.6.2). Once the transition-table
size exceeds the size of the level-one data cache, this approach slows down
considerably.

Implementing the Repository

The implementation of the repository storage for the information associated
with a given name can be orthogonal to the lookup mechanism. Different ta-
bles may need distinct and different structures to accommodate the kinds of
information that the compiler needs. Nonetheless, these repositories should
have some common properties (see also Appendix B.4).

■
Record storage should be either contiguous or block-contiguous to im-
Block contiguous
These allocators use two protocols: a ma-
jor allocation obtains space for multiple
records while a minor one returns a single
record. Minor allocations use a fast method;
they amortize the major allocation cost over
many records.

prove locality, decrease allocation costs, and simplify reading and writ-
ing the tables to external media.

■
Each repository should contain enough information to rebuild the lookup
structure, in order to accommodate graceful table expansion, and to fa-
cilitate restoring the structures from external media.



■
The repository should support changes to the search path. For example,
as the parser moves in and out of different scopes, the search path should
change to reflect the current situation.

From a management perspective, the repository must be expandable in order
to handle large programs efficiently without wasting space on small ones.
Its index scheme should be independent of the mapping scheme so that the
map can be expanded independently of the repository; ideally, the map will
be sparse and the repository dense.

SECTION REVIEW
Compilers build ancillary data structures to augment the information stored
in the compiler’s definitive IR. The most visible of these structures is a set of
symbol tables that map a name in the source text or the IR into the set of
properties associated with that name.

This section explored several issues in the design of these ancillary tables. It
showed how linking tables together in explicit search paths can model both
lexical scope rules and inheritance rules. It discussed tradeoffs in the
implementation of both the mapping mechanism and the repository for
these tables.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Using the “sheaf-of-tables” scheme, what is the complexity of inserting
a new name into the table at the current scope? What is the complexity
of looking up a name in the set of tables? How deep are the lexical and
inheritance hierarchies in programs that you write?

2.
When the compiler initializes a scope, it likely needs an initial symbol
table size. How might the parser estimate that initial symbol table size?
How might later passes of the compiler estimate it?

4.6 NAME SPACES

Most discussions of name spaces focus on the source program’s name space:
lexical scopes and inheritance rules. Of equal importance, from the per-
spective of the quality of compiled code, is the name space created in the
compiler’s IR. A specific naming discipline can either expose opportunities
for optimization or obscure them. The choices that the compiler makes with
regard to names determine, to a large extent, which computations can be
analyzed and optimized.



AN ALTERNATIVE TO HASHING
Symbol tables are often implemented with hash maps, due to the expected
efficiency of hashing. If the compiler writer is worried about the unlikely but
possible worst-case behavior of hashing, multiset discrimination provides an
interesting alternative. It avoids the possibility of worst-case behavior by
constructing the index offline, in the scanner.

To use multiset discrimination, the compiler first scans the entire program
and builds a ⟨name,pos⟩ tuple for each instance of an identifier, where name
is the identifier’s lexeme and pos is its ordinal position in the list of classified
words, or tokens. It enters all the tuples into a large set.

Next, the compiler sorts the set lexicographically. In effect, this creates a set
of subsets, one per identifier. Each subset holds the tuples for all the
occurrences of its identifier. Since each tuple refers to a specific token,
through its position value, the compiler can use the sorted set to modify the
token stream. The compiler makes a linear scan over the set, processing each
subset. It allocates a symbol-table index for each unique identifier, then
rewrites the tokens to include that index. The parser can read symbol-table
indices directly from the tokens. If the compiler needs a textual lookup
function, the resulting table is ordered alphabetically for a binary search.

This technique adds some cost to compilation. It makes an extra pass over
the token stream, along with a lexicographic sort. In return, it avoids any
possibility of worst-case behavior from hashing and it makes the initial size of
the symbol table obvious before parsing begins. This technique can replace
a hash table in almost any application in which an offline solution will work.

The IR name space is intimately related to the memory model used in trans-
lation. The compiler may assume that all values are kept in memory, except
when they are actively used in a computation. The compiler may assume that
values are kept in registers whenever possible. If the compiler uses stack-
machine code as its IR, it will keep these active values on the stack. These
different assumptions radically affect the set of values that can be named,
analyzed, and optimized.

This section focuses on issues in name space design; it also introduces one
important example: static single assignment form. The next section explores
the issues that arise in choosing a memory model.

4.6.1 Name Spaces in the IR

When compiler writers design an IR, they should also design a naming dis-
cipline for the compiler to follow. The choice of a name space interacts with



the choice of an IR; some IRs allow broad latitude in naming, while others
make most names implicit in the representation.

Implicit Versus Explicit Names

Tree-like IRs use implicit names for some values. Consider an AST for
a - 2 × b, shown in the margin. It has nodes for each of a, 2, b, 2 × b, and
a - 2 × b. The interior nodes, those for 2 × b and a - 2 × b, lack explicit names
that the compiler can manipulate.

By contrast, three-address code uses only explicit names, which gives the
load
@b
⇒ r0
multI
2, r0
⇒ r1
load
@a
⇒ r2
subI
r2, r1
⇒ r3

ILOC for a - 2 × b
With Unique Names

load
@b
⇒ r0
multI
2, r0
⇒ r1
load
@a
⇒ r0
subI
r0, r1
⇒ r1

ILOC for a - 2 × b
With Name Reuse

compiler control over the naming discipline. It can assign explicit names to
any or all of the values computed in the code. Consider, for example, the
ILOC code for a - 2 × b, shown in the margin. The upper version introduces
a unique name for every unknown value and expression—register names
r0 through r3. After execution, each of those values survives in its own
register. The lower version uses a different naming discipline intended to
conserve names. After it executes, the two quantities that survive are a in r0
and a - 2 × b in r1.

The example makes it appear that graphical IRs use implicit names and
linear IRs use explicit names. It is not that simple. Stack-machine code relies
on an implicit stack data structure, which leads to implicit names for many
values. A CFG has explicit names for each of the nodes so that they can
be connected to the corresponding code fragments. Even an AST can be
rewritten to include explicit names; for any expression or subexpression that
the compiler wants to name, it can insert an assignment and subsequent use
for a compiler-generated name.

Variables Versus Values

In the source program, the set of accessible names is determined by the
source language rules and the details of the program. Declared named vari-
ables are visible; intermediate subexpressions are not. In the statement:

a ← 2 * b + cos(c / 3)

a, b, and c can each be used in subsequent statements. The values of 2 * b,
c / 3, and cos(c / 3) cannot.

In the IR form of the code, the compiler writer must decide which values to
Virtual name
A compiler-generated name is often called
a virtual name, in the same sense as virtual
memory or a virtual register.

expose via consistent, explicit names. The compiler can use as many names
as necessary; compiler writers sometimes refer to these generated names
as virtual names. The compiler might translate the statement so that the
code evaluates each of these three expressions into its own unique name.
Alternatively, by reusing names, it could eliminate any chance for reuse.



THE IMPACT OF NAMING
In the late 1980s, we experimented with naming schemes in a FORTRAN 77
compiler. The first version generated a new name for each computation; it
simply bumped a counter to get a new name. This approach produced large
name spaces; for example, 985 names for a 210-line implementation of the
singular value decomposition (SVD). Objectively, this name space seemed
large. It caused speed and space problems in the register allocator, where
name space size determines the size of many data structures. (Today, we
have better data structures, and much faster machines with more memory.)

The second version used an allocate/free protocol to manage names. The
front end allocated temporary names on demand and freed them when the
immediate uses were finished. This scheme shrank the name space; SVD
used roughly 60 names. Allocation was faster; for example, the time to
compute LIVEOUT sets for SVD decreased by 60 percent (see Section 8.6.1).

Unfortunately, reuse of names obscured the flow of values and degraded
the quality of optimization. The decline in code quality overshadowed any
compile-time benefits.

Further experimentation led to a short set of rules that yielded strong
optimization while mitigating growth in the name space.

1. Each textual expression received a unique name, found by hashing. Thus,
each occurrence of an expression, for example, r17 + r21, targeted the
same register.
2. In ⟨op⟩ ri, rj ⇒ rk, k was chosen so that i, j < k.
3. Register copy operations, ri ⇒ rj, were allowed to have i > j only if rj
corresponded to a declared scalar variable. Registers for variables were
only defined by copy operations. Expressions were evaluated into their
“natural” register and then were moved into the register for the variable.
4. Each store operation, ri ⇒ MEM(rj), was followed by a copy from ri into
the variable’s named register. (Rule 1 ensures that loads from that
location always target the same register. Rule 4 ensures that the virtual
register and memory location contain the same value.)

With this name space, the compiler used about 90 names for SVD. It exposed
all of the optimizations found with the first name-space scheme. The
compiler used these rules until we adopted the SSA name space.

This decision has a direct effect on what the compiler can do in subsequent
optimization.

The compiler writer enforces these decisions by codifying them in the trans-
lation rules that generate the IR. These decisions have a widespread effect
on the efficiency of both the compiler and the code that it generates.



The temptation, of course, is to provide a unique name for each subex-
pression, so as to maximize the opportunities presented to the optimizer.
However, not all subexpressions are of interest. A value that is only live in
a single block does not need a name that persists through the entire proce-
dure. Exposing such a value to procedure-wide analysis and optimization is
unlikely to change the code.

The converse is true, as well. Any value that is live in multiple blocks or
is computed in multiple blocks may merit an explicit, persistent name. Ex-
pressions that are computed in multiple blocks, on multiple paths, are prime
targets for a number of classical global optimizations. Providing a single
consistent name across multiple definitions and uses can expose an expres-
sion to analysis and transformations that improve the compiled code (see
Chapters 8–10).

Finally, the choice of a naming discipline also interacts with decisions about
the level of abstraction in the IR. Consider again the two representations
of an array reference, a[i,j], shown in the margin. The source-level AST,
along with the symbol table, contains all of the essential information needed
to analyze or translate the reference. (The symbol table will contain a’s type,
data area, and offset in that data area along with the number of dimensions
and their upper and lower bounds.) The corresponding ILOC code exposes
more details of the address calculations and provides explicit names for each
subexpression in that calculation.

These two representations expose and name different quantities. The AST
explicitly exposes the fact that the calculation computes the address for
a[i,j], but shows no details of that calculation. The ILOC code exposes
the fact that the address computation involves seven distinct subexpressions,
any one of which might occur elsewhere. The question of which IR is better
depends entirely on how the compiler writer intends to use the information.

4.6.2 Static Single-Assignment Form

Static single-assignment form (SSA) is an IR and a naming discipline that
SSA form
an IR that has a value-based name system,
created by renaming and use of pseudoop-
erations called φ-functions

SSA encodes both control and value flow.
It is used widely in optimization (see Sec-
tion 9.3).

many modern compilers use to encode information about both the flow of
control and the flow of values in the program. In SSA form, each name
corresponds to one definition point in the code. The term static single as-
signment refers to this fact. As a corollary, each use of a name in an opera-
tion encodes information about where the value originated; the textual name
refers to a specific definition point.

A program is in SSA form when it meets two constraints: (1) each definition
φ-function
A φ-function takes several names and
merges them, defining a new name.
has a distinct name; and (2) each use refers to a single definition. To trans-
form an IR program to SSA form, the compiler inserts φ-functions at points



x ← ···
y ← ···
while (x < 100)
x ← x + 1
y ← y + x

x0 ← ···
y0 ← ···
if (x0 ≥ 100) goto next

loop: x1 ← φ(x0,x2)
y1 ← φ(y0,y2)
x2 ← x1 + 1
y2 ← y1 + x2
if (x2 < 100) goto loop

next: x3 ← φ(x0,x2)
y3 ← φ(y0,y2)

(a) Original Code
(b) Code in SSA Form

■ FIGURE 4.7 A Small Loop in SSA Form.

where different control-flow paths merge and it then renames variables so
that the single-assignment property holds.

To clarify the impact of these rules, consider the small loop shown in
Fig. 4.7(a). Panel (b) shows the same code in SSA form. Variable names
include subscripts to create a distinct name for each definition. φ-functions
have been inserted at points where multiple distinct values can reach the
start of a block. Finally, the while construct has been rewritten at a lower
The code shape for the loop is discussed in
Section 7.5.2.
level of abstraction to expose the fact that the initial test refers to x0 while
the end-of-loop test refers to x2.

The φ-function has an unusual semantics. It acts as a copy operation that
selects, as its argument, the value that corresponds to the edge along which
control entered the block. Thus, when control flows into the loop from the
block above the loop, the φ-functions at the top of the loop body copy the
values of x0 and y0 into x1 and y1, respectively. When control flows into the
loop from the test at the loop’s bottom, the φ-functions select their other
arguments, x2 and y2.

The execution semantics of φ-functions are different than other operations.
On entry to a block, all its φ-functions read the value of their appropriate ar-
gument, in parallel. Next, they all define their target SSA names, in parallel.
Defining their behavior in this way allows the algorithms that manipulate
The definition of SSA form prevents two
φ-functions from defining the same SSA
name.
SSA form to ignore the ordering of φ-functions at the top of a block—an
important simplification. It does, however, complicate the process of trans-
lating SSA form back into executable code, as discussed in Section 9.3.5.

SSA form was intended for analysis and optimization. The placement of
Lifetime
For a value a, its lifetime spans from its first
definition to its last use.
φ-functions in SSA form encodes information about the creation and use
of individual values. The single-assignment property of the name space al-
lows the compiler to ignore many issues related to the lifetimes of values;



BUILDING SSA
Static single-assignment form is the only IR we describe that does not have
an obvious construction algorithm. Section 9.3 presents one construction
algorithm in detail. However, a sketch of the construction process will clarify
some of the issues. Assume that the input program is already in ILOC form.
To convert it to an equivalent linear form of SSA, the compiler must first
insert φ-functions and then rename the ILOC virtual registers.

The simplest way to insert φ-functions is to find each block that has multiple
CFG predecessors and add a φ-function for each ILOC virtual register at the
start of that block. This process inserts many unneeded φ-functions; most of
the complexity in the full algorithm focuses on eliminating those extraneous
φ-functions.

To rename the ILOC virtual registers, the compiler can process the blocks, in
a depth-first order. For each virtual register, it keeps a counter. When the
compiler encounters a definition of ri, it increments the counter for ri, say
to k, and rewrites the definition with the name rik. As the compiler traverses
the block, it rewrites each use of ri with rik until it encounters another
definition of ri. (That definition bumps the counter to k + 1.) At the end of a
block, the compiler looks down each control-flow edge and rewrites the
appropriate φ-function parameter for ri in each block that has multiple
predecessors.

After renaming, the code conforms to the two rules of SSA form. Each
definition creates a unique name. Each use refers to a single definition.
Several better SSA construction algorithms exist; they insert fewer
φ-functions than this simple approach.

for example, because names are not redefined, the value of a name is avail-
able along any path that proceeds from that operation. These two properties
simplify and improve many optimizations.

The example exposes some oddities of SSA form that bear explanation.
Consider the φ-function that defines x1. Its first argument, x0, is defined in
the block that precedes the loop. Its second argument, x2, is defined later in
the block labeled loop. Thus, when the φ first executes, one of its arguments
is undefined. In many programming-language contexts, this would cause
problems. Since the φ-function reads only one argument, and that argument
corresponds to the most recently taken edge in the CFG, it can never read
the undefined value.

A φ-function takes an arbitrary number of operands. To fit SSA form into a
three-address IR, the compiler writer must include mechanisms to accom-
modate longer operand lists and to associate those operands with specific



incoming edges. Consider the block at the end of a case statement as shown
in the margin.

The φ-function for x5 must have an argument for each case. The number
of arguments it needs is bounded only by the number of paths that enter
the block. Thus, an operation to represent that φ-function in a linear IR will
need an arbitrary number of arguments. It does not fit directly into the fixed-
arity, three-address scheme.

In a simple array representation for three-address code, the compiler writer
will need a side data structure to hold φ-function arguments. In the other
two schemes for implementing three-address code shown in Fig. 4.5, the
compiler can insert tuples of varying size. For example, the tuples for load
and load immediate might have space for just two names, while the tuple for
a φ-operation could be large enough to accommodate all its operands, plus
an operand count.

SECTION REVIEW
The compiler must generate internal names for all the values computed in a
program. Those names may be explicit or implicit. The rules used to
generate names directly affect the compiler’s ability to analyze and optimize
the IR. Careful use of names can encode and expose facts for later use in
optimization. Proliferation of names enlarges data structures and slows
compilation.

The SSA name space encodes properties that can aid in analysis and
optimization; for example, it lets optimizations avoid the need to reason
about redefinitions of names (see Section 8.4.1). This additional precision in
naming can both simplify algorithms and improve the optimizer’s results.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
The ILOC code shown in the margin on page 193 uses as many vir-
tual register names as practical—assuming that ri and rj cannot be
renamed because they represent variables in the program. Construct
an equivalent code that uses as few virtual names as possible.

2.
Convert the code shown in the margin to SSA form, following the ex-
planation on page 195. Does each φ-functions that you inserted serve
a purpose?



4.7 PLACEMENT OF VALUES IN MEMORY

Almost every IR has an underlying storage map. The compiler must assign
a storage location to each value that the compiled code computes or uses.
That location might be in a register or in memory. It might be a specific loca-
tion: a physical register or ⟨base address,offset⟩ pair. It might be a symbolic
location: a virtual register or a symbolic label. The location’s lifetime must
match the lifetime of the value; that is, it must be available and dedicated to
the value from the time the value is created until the time of its last use.

This section begins with a discussion of memory models—the implicit rules
used to assign values to data areas. The later subsections provide more detail
on data area assignment and layout.

4.7.1 Memory Models

Before the compiler can translate the source program into its IR form, the
compiler must understand, for each value computed in the code, where that
value will reside. The compiler need not enumerate all the values and their
locations, but it must have a mechanism to make those decisions consis-
tently and incrementally as translation proceeds. Typically, compiler writers
make a set of decisions and then apply them throughout translation. To-
gether, these rules form a memory model for the compiled code.

Memory models help define the underlying model of computation: where
does an operation find its arguments? They play a critical role in determining
which problems the compiler must solve and how much space and time it
will take to solve them.

Three memory models are common: a memory-to-memory model, a regis-
Active value
A value is active in the immediate neigh-
borhood where it is used or defined.
ter-to-register model, and a stack model. These models share many charac-
teristics; they differ in where they store values that are active in the current
computation.

Memory-to-Memory Model
Values have their primary home in memory.
Either the IR supports memory-to-memory operations, or the code moves
active values into registers and inactive values back to memory.

Register-to-Register Model
Whenever possible, values are kept in a vir-
tual register; some local, scalar values have their only home in a virtual
register. Global values have their homes in memory (see Section 4.7.2).

Stack Model
Values have their primary home in memory. The compiler
moves active values onto and off of the stack with explicit operations
(e.g., push and pop). Stack-based IRs and ISAs often include operations
to reorder the stack (e.g., swap).



add @a, @b ⇒ @c

load
@a
⇒ vri
load
@b
⇒ vrj
add
vri, vrj ⇒ vrk
store vrk
⇒ @c

add vra, vrb ⇒ vrc

push @b

push @a

add

pop
⇒ @c

(a) Memory-to-Memory Model
(b) Register-to-Register Model
(c) Stack Model

■ FIGURE 4.8 Three-Operand Add Under Different Memory Models.

Fig. 4.8 shows the same add operation under each of these models. Panel (a)
Unambiguous value
A value that can be accessed with just one
name is unambiguous.

Ambiguous value
Any value that can be accessed by multiple
names is ambiguous.

shows the operation under two different assumptions. The left column as-
sumes that the add takes memory operands, shown as symbolic labels. The
right column assumes that the add is a register-to-register operation, with
values resident in memory. The choice between these two designs probably
depends on the target machine’s ISA. Panel (b) shows the same add in a
register-to-register model. It assumes that a, b, and c are all unambiguous
scalar values that reside in virtual registers: vra, vrb, and vrc, respectively.
Panel (c) shows the operation under a stack model; it assumes that the vari-
able’s home locations are in memory and named by symbolic labels.

These distinct memory models have a strong impact on the shape of the IR
code and on the priorities for the optimizer and back end.

■
In a memory-to-memory model, the unoptimized form of the code may
use just a few registers. That situation places a premium on optimiza-
tions that promote values into unused registers for nontrivial parts of
their lifetimes. In the back end, register allocation focuses more on map-
ping names than on reducing demand for physical registers.

■
In a register-to-register model, the unoptimized code may use many
more virtual registers than the target machine supplies. That situation
encourages optimizations that do not significantly increase demand for
registers. In the back end, register allocation is required for correctness
and is one of the key determiners of runtime performance.

■
In a stack model, the structure of the target machine becomes critical.
The JAVA HotSpot server compiler trans-
lated JAVA bytecode to a graphical IR for
optimization and code generation.
If the ISA has stack operations, as does the JAVA virtual machine, then
optimization focuses on improving the stack computation. If the ISA is
a CISC or RISC processor, then the compiler will likely translate the
stack-machine code into some other form for code generation.

In the end, the choice of memory model has a strong influence on the design
of the compiler’s optimizer and back end.



THE HIERARCHY OF MEMORY OPERATIONS IN ILOC 9X
Under any memory model, the compiler writer should look for ways to
encode more facts about values into the IR. In the 1990s, we built a research
compiler that used an IR named ILOC 9x. The IR featured a hierarchy of
memory operations that allowed the compiler to encode knowledge about
values kept in memory. At the bottom of the hierarchy, the compiler had
little or no knowledge about the value; at the top of the hierarchy, it knew
the actual value. These operations are as follows:

Operation
Meaning

Immediate load
Loads a known constant value into a register.
Nonvarying load
Loads a value that does not change at runtime. The
compiler does not know the value but can prove
that the program does not change it.
Scalar load & store
Operate on a scalar value, not an array element,
a structure element, or a pointer-based value.
Generic load &
store
Operate on a value that may vary and may be non-
scalar. It is the general-case operation.

With this hierarchy, the front end encoded knowledge about the target value
directly into the ILOC 9x code. Other passes could rewrite operations from a
more general to a more restricted form as they discovered new facts. For
example, if the compiler discovered that a load always produced a known
constant value, it replaced the generic or scalar load with an immediate load.

Optimizations capitalized on the facts encoded in this way. For example, a
comparison between the result of a nonvarying load and a constant must
itself be invariant—a fact that might be difficult or impossible to prove with
a generic load operation.

4.7.2 Keeping Values in Registers

With a register-to-register memory model, the compiler tries to assign as
Spill
A register allocator spills a value by storing
it to a designated location in memory. It
may later restore the value to a register.

many values as possible to virtual registers. This approach relies heavily on
the register allocator to map virtual registers in the IR to physical registers
in the final code, and to spill to memory any virtual register that it cannot
keep in a physical register.

The compiler cannot keep an ambiguous value in a register across an assign-
ment. With an unambiguous value x, the compiler knows precisely where x’s
value changes: at assignments to x. Thus, the compiler can safely generate
code that keeps x in a register.



With an ambiguous value x, however, an assignment to some other ambigu-
ous value y might change x’s value. If the compiler tries to hold x in a register
across an assignment to y, the register may not be updated with the new
value. To make matters worse, in a given procedure, x and y might refer to
the same storage location in some invocations and not in others. This situ-
ation makes it difficult for the compiler to generate correct code that keeps
x in a register. Relegating x to memory lets the addressing hardware resolve
which assignments should change x and which should not.

In practice, compilers decide which values they consider unambiguous,
If a call passes a global name to a call-by-
reference parameter, the callee can access
the value with either its global name or the
formal parameter name.

The same effect occurs when a call passes
a name x in two different call-by-reference
parameter slots.

and relegate all ambiguous values to storage in memory—one of the data
areas or the heap—rather than in a register. Ambiguity can arise in mul-
tiple ways. Values stored in pointer-based variables are often ambiguous.
Call-by-reference parameters can be ambiguous. Many compilers treat ar-
ray-element values as ambiguous because the compiler cannot tell if two
references, such as A[i,j] and A[m,n] can ever refer to the same element.

Typically, compilers focus on proving that a given value is unambiguous.
The analysis might be cursory and local. For example, in C, any local vari-
able whose address is never taken is unambiguous. More complex analyses
build sets of possible names for each pointer variable; any variable whose
set has just one element is unambiguous. Analysis cannot resolve all am-
biguities; the unprovable cases are treated as if they were proven to be
ambiguous.

Language features can affect the compiler’s ability to analyze ambiguity.
For example, ANSI C includes two keywords that directly communicate
information about ambiguity. The restrict keyword informs the compiler
that a pointer is unambiguous. It is often used when a procedure passes an
address directly at a call site. The volatile keyword lets the programmer
declare that the contents of a variable may change arbitrarily and without
notice. It is used for hardware device registers and for variables that might
be modified by interrupt service routines or other threads of control in an
application.

4.7.3 Assigning Values to Data Areas

Just as the compiler must choose a name for each value in the program,
Data area
A region in memory set aside to hold data
values. Each data area is associated with
some specific scope.

Examples include local data areas for pro-
cedures and global data areas.

so, too, must it decide where those values will reside at runtime. While the
memory model determines where values live while they are active, each
of the memory models discussed in Section 4.7.1 consigns some values to
memory when they are not active. The compiler must decide, for each such
value, where it should reside during its lifetime.



Most temporary values will live in the space reserved for active values—
either registers or memory locations in the local data area—as determined
by both the memory model and the availability of space. For variables that
are declared in the source program, the compiler assigns each one a perma-
nent home, based on its individual properties: its lifetime, its visibility, and
its declaring scope.

Lifetime
A value’s lifetime refers to the period of time during which its
value can be defined or referenced. Outside of a value’s lifetime, it is
undefined.

Region of Visibility
A value is visible if it can be named—that is, the
code can read or write the value. Its region of visibility is, simply, the
code in which it is visible.

Declaring Scope
A variable’s lifetime and visibility depend on the scope
that declares it. For example, a file static variable in C has a lifetime of
the entire execution; it is only visible inside the file that declares it.

Programming languages have rules that determine lifetime, visibility, and
scope for each name.

To simplify memory management, most compilers create a set of data areas
associated with various program scopes. For memory resident variables, the
combination of lifetime, visibility, and declaring scope determines which
data area will hold the variable’s value.

From a storage layout perspective, the compiler will categorize lifetimes
into one of three categories.

Automatic
An automatic variable’s lifetime matches one activation of its
Automatic
A name whose lifetime matches a single
activation of the scope that declares it is an
automatic variable.

scope (a procedure or block). The value is defined and used inside the
scope and its value ceases to exist on exit from the scope. A local variable
is, typically, automatic by default.

We call these variables “automatic” because their allocation and deal-
location can be handled as part of entry and exit for the corresponding
scope. At runtime, each invocation of a procedure has its own local data
area where automatic variables can be stored.

Static
A static variable’s lifetime might span multiple activations of its
Static
A name that retains its value across mul-
tiple activations of its scope is a static
variable.

declaring scope. If it is assigned a value, that value persists after control
exists the scope where the assignment occurred.

The compiler can allocate such variables once, before execution; they are,
in effect, always present. Static variables are stored in a preallocated data
area associated with the declaring scope. The compiler may combine the
static data areas for multiple scopes.



■ FIGURE 4.9 Variable Placement by Scope and Lifetime.

Constant values are a special case; they are static values that can be ini-
tialized with an assembly-level directive. The compiler typically creates
a separate data area for them, often called a constant pool.

Irregular
An irregular variable has a lifetime that is not tied to any single
Irregular
An entity whose lifetime depends on ex-
plicit allocation and either explicit or
implicit deallocation is an irregular entity.

scope. It is, typically, allocated explicitly; it may be freed either explicitly
or implicitly. Examples include objects in JAVA and strings created with

malloc in C.

Variables with irregular lifetimes are, in general, allocated space on the
runtime heap (see Section 5.6.1).

The compiler can categorize each value by its lifetime and scope. This clas-
sification suggests a specific data area for the value’s storage. Fig. 4.9 shows
a typical scheme that a compiler might use to place variables into registers
and data areas.

Given a mapping from values to data areas, the compiler must assign each
memory-resident value a location. It iterates over the data areas and, within
a data area, over the values for that data area. It assigns each value a specific
offset from the start of the data area. Algorithms for this assignment are
discussed in Section 5.6.3.

For values that might be kept in registers, the compiler assigns them a vir-
tual register name. The actual assignment of virtual registers to hardware
registers is left to the register allocator.



SECTION REVIEW
The compiler must determine, for each value that the program computes,
where that value will reside at runtime. The compiler determines those
locations based on the programming language, on the memory model
adopted by the compiler, on lifetime information for the values, and on the
compiler writer’s knowledge of the target machine’s system architecture.
The compiler systematically assigns each value to a register or a data area
and assigns offsets within data areas to individual values.

Decisions about the placement of values can affect the performance of
compiled code. Storage layout can change the locality behavior of the
program. Storage assignment decisions can encode subtle knowledge
about properties of the underlying code, such as the ambiguity of values.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Consider the function fib shown in the margin. Write down the ILOC
that a compiler’s front end might generate for this code using a
register-to-register model and using a memory-to-memory model.
How does the code for the two models compare?

2.
Write the pseudocode for an algorithm that takes a list of variables
assigned to some data area and assigns them offsets. Explain what in-
formation the compiler needs for each variable.

4.8 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

The choice of an IR has a major impact on the design, implementation,
speed, and effectiveness of a compiler. None of the intermediate forms de-
scribed in this chapter are, definitively, the right answer for all compilers
or all tasks in a given compiler. The compiler writer must consider the
overall goals of a compiler project when selecting an IR, designing its im-
plementation, and adding ancillary data structures such as symbol and label
tables.

Contemporary compiler systems use all manner of IRs, ranging from parse
trees and abstract syntax trees (often used in source-to-source systems)
through lower-than-machine-level linear codes (used, for example, in GCC).
Many compilers use multiple IRs—building a second or third one to per-
form a particular analysis or transformation, then modifying the original,
and definitive, one to reflect the result.



CHAPTER NOTES

The literature on IRs and experience with them is sparse. Nonetheless, IRs
have a major impact on both the structure and behavior of a compiler. The
classic IR forms, such as syntax trees, ASTs, DAGs, quadruples, triples,
and one-address code have been described in textbooks since the 1970s [8,
36,157,181]. Newer IR forms like SSA [56,120,279] are described in the
literature on analysis and optimization. The original JAVA HotSpot Server
compiler used a form of program dependence graph as its definitive IR [92].
Muchnick discusses IRs in detail and highlights the use of multiple levels
of IR in a single compiler [279].

The observation that multiple passes over the code can lead to more efficient
code dates back to Floyd [160]; this fundamental observation creates the
need for IR and justifies the added expense of the multipass compiler. This
insight applies in many contexts within a compiler.

The idea of using a hash function to recognize textually identical operations
dates back to Ershov [150]. Its specific application in Lisp systems seems to
appear in the early 1970s [135,174]; by 1980, it was common enough that
McCarthy mentions it without citation [267].

Cai and Paige introduced multiset discrimination as an alternative to hash-
ing [71]. Their intent was to create an efficient lookup mechanism with
guaranteed constant time behavior. Closure-free regular expressions, de-
scribed in Section 2.6.2, can achieve a similar effect. The work on shrinking
the size of Rn’s AST was done by David Schwartz and Scott Warren.

EXERCISES

1.
Both a parse tree and an abstract syntax tree retain information about
Section 4.3
the form of the source program.

a.
What is the relationship between the size of the parse tree and the
size of the input program?

b.
What is the relationship between the size of the abstract syntax tree
and the size of the input program?

c.
What relationship would you expect between the size of the parse
tree and the size of the abstract syntax tree? In other words, what
value would you expect for
|parse tree|

|abstract syntax tree| ?

2.
Write an algorithm to convert an expression tree into a DAG.


Exercises
205

■ FIGURE 4.10 Program for Exercise 5.

3.
Consider the following code fragment. Show how it might be repre-
Section 4.4
sented in an abstract syntax tree, in a control-flow graph, and in three-
address code.

if (c[i] ̸= 0)
then a[i] ← b[i] ÷ c[i];
else a[i] ← b[i];

Discuss the advantages of each representation. For what applications
would one representation be preferable to the others?

4.
The algorithm for constructing a CFG, shown in Fig. 4.6, assumes that
the conditional branch operation, cbr, specifies a label for both the taken
branch and the fall-through branch.

Modify both FindLeaders and BuildGraph to handle input code where the
cbr operation only specifies the taken branch.

5.
You are writing a compiler for a simple lexically scoped language. Con-
Section 4.5
sider the example program shown in Fig. 4.10.

a.
Draw the symbol table and its contents just before the line of code
indicated by the arrow.

b.
For each name mentioned in the statement indicated by the arrow,
show which declaration defines it.

6.
Consider the code fragment shown in Fig. 4.11. Draw its CFG.



x ← ···
y ← ···
a ← y + 2
b ← 0

while (x < a)
if (y < x) then
x ← y + 1
y ← b × 2
else
x ← y + 2
y ← a ÷ 2;

w ← x + 2
z ← y × a
y ← y + 1

■ FIGURE 4.11 Code Fragment for Exercise 6.

7.
Write both three-address code and stack-machine code to evaluate the
Section 4.6
expression a × (b + c) ÷ d. Assume that the IR can represent a load of a’s
value with a load from the label @a.

a.
How many names does the three-address code use?

b.
How many names does the stack-machine code use?

8.
Three-address code and two-address code differ in the ways that the
operations interact with the name space. With three-address code, over-
writing a value in some name n is a choice. With two-address code,
ordinary arithmetic operations such as add overwrite one of the two ar-
guments. Thus, with two-address code, the compiler must choose which
operands to preserve and which operands to overwrite.

Write down three ways that the compiler might encode the expression
a ← b × c into a low-level two-address code. Assume that b and c reside
in rb and rc before the multiply operation.

How might the compiler choose between these different encodings of
the operation into two-address code?

9.
Consider the three C procedures shown in Fig. 4.12.
Section 4.7

a.
In a compiler that uses a register-to-register memory model, which
variables in procedures A, B, and C would the compiler be forced to
store in memory? Justify your answer.

b.
Suppose the compiler uses a memory-to-memory model. Consider
the execution of the two statements that are in the if clause of the
if–else construct. If the compiler has two registers available at that
point in the computation, how many loads and stores would the


Exercises
207

static int max = 0;

void A(int b, int e)
{
int a, c, d, p;

a = B(b);
if (b > 100) {
c = a + b;
d = c * 5 + e;
}
else
c = a * b;

p = c;
C(&p);
}

int B(int k)
{
int x, y;

x = pow(2, k);
y = x * 5;
return y;
}

void C(int *p)
{
if (*p > max)
max = *p;
}

■ FIGURE 4.12 Code for Exercise 9.

compiler need to issue in order to load values in registers and store
them back to memory during execution of those two statements?
What if the compiler has three registers available?

10.
In FORTRAN, two variables can be forced to begin at the same stor-
age location with an equivalence statement. For example, the following
statement forces a and b to share storage:

equivalence (a,b)

Can the compiler keep a local variable in a register throughout the pro-
cedure if that variable appears in an equivalence statement? Justify your
answer.


This page intentionally left blank




