Chapter5

Syntax-Driven Translation

ABSTRACT
The compiler’s task is to translate the input program into a form where it
can execute directly on the target machine. The scanner and parser can an-
alyze the code presented for compilation and determine whether that code
constitutes a well-formed program in the source language. If the compiler is
to perform translation, optimization, and code generation, however, it must
build an IR version of the code for the compiler’s later use. That process
requires the compiler to reason about the code at a level that is deeper than
the context-free syntax.

This chapter looks at some of the problems that arise in performing that first
translation from source code to IR in the compiler’s front end, along with
the mechanisms used to solve those problems. It focuses on a particular style
of syntax-driven computation that was popularized by parser generators—
a style that has become common practice.

KEYWORDS
Syntax-Driven Translation, IR Generation, Symbol Tables

5.1 INTRODUCTION

Fundamentally, the compiler is a program that reads in another program,
builds a representation of its meaning, analyzes and improves the code in
that form, and translates the code so that it executes on some target machine.
Translation, analysis, optimization, and code generation require an in-depth
understanding of the input program. The purpose of syntax-driven transla-
tion is to begin to assemble the knowledge that later stages of compilation
will need.

As a compiler parses the input program, it builds an IR version of the code.
It annotates that IR with facts that it discovers, such as the type and size
of a variable, and with facts that it derives, such as where it can store each
value. Compilers use two mechanisms to build the IR and its ancillary data
structures: (1) syntax-driven translation, a form of computation embedded
into the parser and sequenced by the parser’s actions, and (2) subsequent
traversals of the IR to perform more complex computations.



Conceptual Roadmap

The primary purpose of a compiler is to translate code from the source lan-
guage into the target language. This chapter explores the mechanism that
compiler writers use to translate a source-code program into an IR program.
The compiler writer plans a translation, at the granularity of productions in
the source-language grammar, and tools execute the actions in that plan as
the parser recognizes individual productions in the grammar. The specific
sequence of actions taken at compile time depends on both the plan and the
parse.

During translation, the compiler develops an understanding, at an opera-
tional level, of the source program’s meaning. The compiler builds a model
of the input program’s name space. It uses that model to derive information
about the type of each named entity. It also uses that model to decide where,
at runtime, each value computed in the code will live. Taken together, these
facts let the compiler emit the initial IR program that embodies the meaning
of the original source code program.

A Few Words About Time

Translation exposes all of the temporal issues that arise in compiler con-
struction. At design time, the compiler writer plans both runtime behavior
and compile-time mechanisms to create code that will elicit that behavior.
She encodes those plans into a set of syntax-driven rules associated with
the productions in the grammar. Still at design time, she must reason about
both compile-time support for translation, in the form of structures such as
symbol tables and processes such as type checking, and runtime support to
let the code find and access values. (We will see that support in Chapters 6
and 7, but the compiler writer must think about how to create, use, and
maintain that support while designing and implementing the initial transla-
tion.)

At compiler-build time, the parser generator turns the grammar and the
Runtime system
the routines that implement abstractions
such as the heap and I/O
syntax-driven translation rules into an executable parser. At compile time,
the parser maps out the behaviors and bindings that will take effect at run-
time and encodes them in the translated program. At runtime, the compiled
code interacts with the runtime system to create the behaviors that the com-
piler writer planned back at design time.

Overview

The compiler writer creates a tool—the compiler—that translates the input
program into a form where it executes directly on the target machine. The



compiler, then, needs an implementation plan, a model of the name space,
and a mechanism to tie model manipulation and IR generation back to the
structure and syntax of the input program. To accomplish these tasks:

■
The compiler needs a mechanism that ties its information gathering and

IR-building processes to the syntactic structure and the semantic details
of the input program.

■
The compiler needs to understand the visibility of each name in the
code—that is, given a name x, it must know the entity to which x is
bound. Given that binding, it needs complete type information for x and
an access method for x.

■
The compiler needs an implementation scheme for each programming
language construct, from a variable reference to a case statement and
from a procedure call to a heap allocation.

This chapter focuses on a mechanism that is commonly used to spec-
ify syntax-driven computation. The compiler writer specifies actions that
should be taken when the parser reduces by a given production. The parser
generator arranges for those actions to execute at the appropriate points in
the parse. Compiler writers use this mechanism to drive basic information
gathering, IR generation, and error checking at levels that are deeper than
syntax (e.g., does a statement reference an undeclared identifier?).

Section 5.3 introduces a common mechanism used to translate source code
Chapters 6 and 7 discuss implementation
of other common programming language
constructs.
into IR. It describes, as examples, implementation schemes for expression
evaluation and some simple control-flow constructs. Section 5.4 explains
how compilers manage and use symbol tables to model the naming environ-
ment and track the attributes of names. Section 5.5 introduces the subject
of type analysis; a complete treatment of type systems is beyond the scope
of this book. Finally, Section 5.6 explores how the compiler assigns storage
locations to values.

5.2 BACKGROUND

The compiler makes myriad decisions about the detailed implementation of
the program. Because the decisions are cumulative, compiler writers often
adopt a strategy of progressive translation. The compiler’s front end builds
an initial IR program and a set of annotations using information available
in the parser. It then analyzes the IR to infer additional information and
refines the details in the IR and annotations as it discovers and infers more
information.



To see the need for progressive translation, consider a tree representation
of an array reference a[i,j]. The parser can easily build a relatively ab-
stract IR, such as the near-source AST shown in the margin. The AST only
encodes facts that are implicit in the code’s text.

To generate assembly code for the reference, the compiler will need much
more detail than the near-source AST provides. The low-level tree shown in
the margin exposes that detail and reveals a set of facts that cannot be seen
in the near-source tree. All those facts play a role in the final code.

■
The compiler must know that a is a 10 × 10 array of four-byte integers
with lower bounds of 1 in each dimension. Those facts are derived from
the statements that declare or create a.

■
The compiler must know that a is stored in row-major order (see
Fig. 5.16). That fact was decided by the language designer or the com-
piler writer before the compiler was written.

■
The compiler must know that @a is an assembly-language label that eval-
uates to the runtime address of the first element of a (see Section 7.3).
That fact derives from a naming strategy adopted at design time by the
compiler writer.

To generate executable code for a[i,j], the compiler must derive or develop
these facts as part of the translation process.

This chapter explores both the mechanism of syntax-driven translation and
its use in the initial translation of code from the source language to IR.
The mechanism that we describe was introduced in an early LR(1) parser
generator, yacc. The notation allows the compiler writer to specify a small
snippet of code, called an action, that will execute when the parser reduces
by a specific production in the grammar.

Syntax-driven translation lets the compiler writer specify the action and re-
lies on the parser to decide when to apply that action. The syntax of the
input program determines the sequence in which the actions occur. The
actions can contain arbitrary code, so the compiler writer can build and
maintain complex data structures. With forethought and planning, the com-
piler writer can use this syntax-driven translation mechanism to implement
complex behaviors.

Through syntax-driven translation, the compiler develops knowledge about
the program that goes beyond the context-free syntax of the input code.
Syntactically, a reference to a variable x is just a name. During translation,
the compiler discovers and infers much more about x from the contexts in
which the name appears.



■
The source code may define and manipulate multiple distinct entities
with the name x. The compiler must map each reference to x back to the
appropriate runtime instance of x; it must bind x to a specific entity based
on the naming environment in which the reference occurs. To do so, it
builds and uses a detailed model of the input program’s name space.

■
Once the compiler knows the binding of x in the current scope, it must
understand the kinds of values that x can hold, their size and structure,
and their lifetimes. This information lets the compiler determine what
operations can apply to x, and prevents improper manipulation of x. This
knowledge requires that the compiler determine the type of x and how
that type interacts with the contexts in which x appears.

■
To generate code that manipulates x’s value, the compiler must know
where that value will reside at runtime. If x has internal structure, as
with an array, structure, string, or record, the compiler needs a formula
to find and access individual elements inside x. The compiler must de-
termine, for each value that the program will compute, where that value
will reside.

To complicate matters, executable programs typically include code com-
piled at different times. The compiler writer must design mechanisms that
allow the results of the separate compilations to interoperate correctly and
seamlessly. That process begins with syntax-driven translation to build an

IR representation of the code. It continues with further analysis and refine-
ment. It relies on carefully planned interactions between procedures and
name spaces (see Chapter 6).

5.3 SYNTAX-DRIVEN TRANSLATION

Syntax-driven translation is a collection of techniques that compiler writers
use to tie compile-time actions to the grammatical structure of the input
program. The front end discovers that structure as it parses the code. The
compiler writer provides computations that the parser triggers at specific
points in the parse. In an LR(1) parser, those actions are triggered when the
parser performs a reduction.

5.3.1 A First Example

Fig. 5.1(a) shows a simple grammar that describes the set of positive inte-
gers. We can use syntax-driven actions tied to this grammar to compute the
value of any valid positive integer.

Panel (b) contains the Action and Goto tables for the grammar. The parser
has three possible reductions, one per production.



1
Number
→
DList

2
DList
→
DList digit

3
|
digit

Action
Goto

State
eof
digit
DList

0
s 2
1

1
acc
s 3

2
r 3
r 3

3
r 2
r 2

(a) The Positive Integer Grammar
(b) Its Action and Goto Tables

■ FIGURE 5.1 The Grammar for Positive Integers.

■
The parser reduces by rule 3, DList → digit, on the leftmost digit in the
number.

■
The parser reduces by rule 2, DList → DList digit, for each digit after the
first digit.

■
The parser reduces by rule 1, Number → DList after it has already reduced
the last digit.

The parser can compute the integer’s value with a series of production-
This strategy has been used by assembly
language programmers for decades.
specific tasks. It can accumulate the value left to right and, with each new
digit, multiply the accumulated value by ten and add the next digit. Values
are associated with each symbol used in the parse. We can encode this strat-
egy into production-specific rules that are applied when the parser reduces.

Using the notation popularized by the parser generators yacc and bison, the
rules might be:

Number
: DList
{ return $1; } ;
DList
: DList digit
{ $$ = $1 * 10 + CToI($2); } ;
| digit
{ $$ = CToI($1); } ;

The symbols $$, $1, and $2 refer to values associated with grammar symbols
in the production. $$ refers to the nonterminal symbol on the rule’s left-hand
side (LHS). The symbol $i refers to the value for the ith symbol on the rule’s
right-hand side (RHS).

The example assumes that CToI() converts the character from the lexeme to
an integer. The compiler writer must pay attention to the types of the stack
cells represented by $$, $1, and so on.

Using the Action and Goto tables from Fig. 5.1(b) to parse the string “175”,
Recall that the initial $ on the stack repre-
sents the pair ⟨INVALID, INVALID⟩.
an LR(1) parser would take the sequence of actions shown in Fig. 5.2. The
reductions, in order, are: reduce 3, reduce 2, reduce 2, and accept.



Iteration
State
Word
Stack
Action

0
–
1
$ ⟨Number 0⟩
shift 2

1
2
7
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨digit 2⟩
reduce 3

2
1
7
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨DList 1⟩
shift 3

3
3
5
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨DList 1⟩ ⟨digit 3⟩
reduce 2

4
1
5
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨DList 1⟩
shift 3

5
3
eof
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨DList 1⟩ ⟨digit 3⟩
reduce 2

6
1
eof
$ ⟨Number 0⟩ ⟨DList 1⟩
accept

■ FIGURE 5.2 Parser Actions for the Number “175”.

■
Reduce 3 applies rule 3’s action with the integer 1 as the value of digit.
The rule assigns one to the LHS DList.

■
Reduce 2 applies rule 2’s action, with 1 as the RHS DList’s value and the
integer 7 as the digit. It assigns 1 × 10 + 7 = 17 to the LHS DList.

■
Reduce 2 applies rule 2’s action, with 17 as the RHS DList’s value and 5
as the digit. It assigns 17 × 10 + 5 = 175 to the LHS DList.

■
The accept action, which is also a reduction by rule 1, returns the value
of the LHS DList, which is 175.

The reduction rules, applied in the order of actions taken by the parser, cre-
ate a simple framework that computes the integer’s value.

The critical observation is that the parser applies these rules in a predictable
order, driven by the structure of the grammar and the parse of the input
string. The compiler writer specifies an action for each reduction; the se-
quencing and application of those actions depend entirely on the grammar
and the input string. This kind of syntax-driven computation forms a pro-
gramming paradigm that plays a central role in translation and finds many
other applications.

Of course, this example is overkill. A real system would almost certainly
int stoi( char *s ) {
int i = 0;

while(’0’ ≤ *s≤ ’9’) {
i = i * 10
+ ((int)*s - ’0’);
s++;
}

return i;
}

perform this same computation in a small, specialized piece of code, similar
to the one in the margin. It implements the same computation, without the
overhead of the more general scanning and parsing algorithms. In practice,
this code would appear inline rather than as a function call. (The call over-
head likely exceeds the cost of the loop.) Nonetheless, the example works
well for explaining the principles of syntax-driven computation.

An Equivalent Treewalk Formulation

These integer-grammar value computations can also be written as recursive
treewalks over syntax trees. Fig. 5.3(a) shows the syntax tree for “175” with



■ FIGURE 5.3 Treewalk Computations for the Positive Integer Grammar.

the left recursive grammar. Panel (b) shows a simple treewalk to compute its
value. It uses “integer(c)” to convert a single character to an integer value.

The treewalk formulation exposes several important aspects of yacc-style
syntax-driven computation. Information flows up the syntax tree from the
leaves toward the root. The action associated with a production only has
names for values associated with grammar symbols named in the produc-
tion. Bottom-up information flow works well in this paradigm. Top-down
information flow does not.

The restriction to bottom-up information flow might appear problematic. In
fact, the compiler writer can reach around the paradigm and evade these re-
strictions by using nonlocal variables and data structures in the “actions.”
Indeed, one use for a compiler’s symbol table is precisely to provide nonlo-
cal access to data derived by syntax-driven computations.

In principle, any top-down information flow problem can be solved with a
bottom-up framework by passing all of the information upward in the tree
to a common ancestor and solving the problem at that point. In practice,
that idea does not work well because (1) the implementor must plan all
the information flow; (2) she must write code to implement it; and (3) the
computed result appears at a point in the tree far from where it is needed. In
practice, it is often better to rethink the computation than to pass all of that
information around the tree.

Form of the Grammar

Because the grammar dictates the sequence of actions, its shape affects the
computational strategy. Consider a right-recursive version of the grammar
for positive integers. It reduces the rightmost digit first, which suggests the
following approach:



Number
: DList
{ return second($1); } ;
DList
: digit DList
{ $$ = pair(10 * first($2),
first($2) * CToI($1) + second($2)); }
| digit
{ $$ = pair(10,CToI($1)); } ;

This scheme accumulates, right to left, both a multiplier and a value. To
store both values with a DList, it uses a pair constructor and the functions

first and second to access a pair’s component values. While this paradigm
works, it is much harder to understand than the mechanism for the left-
recursive grammar.

In grammar design, the compiler writer should consider the kinds of com-
putation that she wants the parser to perform. Sometimes, changing the
grammar can produce a simpler, faster computation.

5.3.2 Translating Expressions

Expressions form a large portion of most programs. If we consider them
as trees—that is, trees rather than directed acyclic graphs—then they are
a natural example for syntax-driven translation. Fig. 5.4 shows a simple
syntax-driven framework to build an abstract syntax tree for expressions.
The rules are simple.

■
If a production contains an operator, it builds an interior node to repre-
sent the operator.

■
If a production derives a name or number, it builds a leaf node and
records the lexeme.

Production
Syntax-Driven Actions

Expr
→ Expr + Term
{ $$ ← MakeNode2( plus, $1, $3 ) ; };

|
Expr − Term
{ $$ ← MakeNode2( minus, $1, $3 ) ; };

|
Term
{ $$ ← $1 ; };

Term
→ Term × Factor
{ $$ ← MakeNode2( times, $1, $3 ) ; };

|
Term ÷ Factor
{ $$ ← MakeNode2( divide, $1, $3 ) ; };

|
Factor
{ $$ ← $1 ; };

Factor → ( Expr )
{ $$ ← $2 ; };

|
number
{ $$ ← MakeLeaf( number,lexeme ) ; };

|
name
{ $$ ← MakeLeaf( name,lexeme ); };

■ FIGURE 5.4 Building an Abstract Syntax Tree.



Production
Syntax-Driven Actions

Expr
→ Expr + Term
{ $$ ← NextRegister() ;

Emit( add, $1, $3, $$ ) ; };

|
Expr − Term
{ $$ ← NextRegister() ;

Emit( sub, $1, $3, $$ ) ; };

|
Term
{ $$ ← $1 ; };

Term
→ Term × Factor
{ $$ ← NextRegister() ;

Emit( mult, $1, $3, $$ ) ; };

|
Term ÷ Factor
{ $$ ← NextRegister() ;

Emit( div, $1, $3, $$ ) ; };

|
Factor
{ $$ ← $1 ; };

Factor → ( Expr )
{ $$ ← $2 ; };

|
number
{ $$ ← NumberIntoReg( lexeme ) ; };

|
name
{ entry ← STLookup(lexeme );

$$ ← ValueIntoReg( entry ) ; };

■ FIGURE 5.5 Emitting Three-Address Code for Expressions.

■
If the production exists to enforce precedence, it passes the AST for the
subexpression upward.

The code uses two constructors to build the nodes. MakeNode2(a, b, c)
builds a binary node of type a with children b and c. MakeLeaf(name, a)
builds a leaf node and associates it with the lexeme a. For the expression
a - 2 × b, this translation scheme would build the simple AST shown in the
margin.

ASTs have a direct and obvious relationship to the grammatical structure of
the input program. Three-address code lacks that direct mapping. Nonethe-
less, a syntax-driven framework can easily emit three-address code for ex-
pressions and assignments. Fig. 5.5 shows a syntax-driven framework to
emit ILOC-like code from the classic expression grammar. The framework
assumes that values reside in memory at the start of the expression.

To simplify the framework, the compiler writer has provided high-level
functions to abstract away the details of where values are stored.

■
NextRegister returns a new register number.

■
NumberIntoReg returns the number of a register that holds the constant
value from the lexeme.

■
STLookup takes a name as input and returns the symbol table entry for
the entity to which the name is currently bound.



■
ValueIntoReg returns the number of a register that holds the current value
of the name from the lexeme.

If the grammar included assignment, it would need a helper function RegIn-

toMemory to move a value from a register into memory.

Helper functions such NumberIntoReg and ValueIntoReg must emit three-
Most of the functions have obvi-
ous implementations. For example,
NumberIntoReg(‘2’) can emit a load im-
mediate operation.

address code that represents the access methods for the named entities. If
the IR only has low-level operations, as occurs in ILOC, these functions can
become complex. The alternative approach is to introduce high-level oper-
ations into the three-address code that preserve the essential information,
and to defer elaboration of these operations until after the compiler fully
understands the storage map and the access methods.

Applying this syntax-driven translation scheme to the expression a - 2 × b
loadAI
rarp, @a
⇒ r1
loadI
2
⇒ r2
loadAI
rarp, @b
⇒ r3
mult
r2, r3
⇒ r4
sub
r1, r4
⇒ r5

ILOC Code for a - 2 ×b

produces the ILOC code shown in the margin. The code assumes that rarp
holds a pointer to the procedure’s local data area and that @a and @b are the
offsets from rarp at which the program stores the values of a and b. The code
leaves the result in r5.

Implementation in an LR(1) Parser

This style of syntax-driven computation was introduced in yacc, an early

LALR(1) parser generator. The implementation requires two changes to the

LR(1) skeleton parser. Understanding those changes sheds insight on both
the yacc notation and how to use it effectively. Fig. 5.6 shows the modified
skeleton LR(1) parser. Changes are typeset in bold typeface.

The first change creates storage for the value associated with a grammar
symbol in the derivation. The original skeleton parser stored its state in
⟨symbol, state⟩ pairs kept on a stack, where symbol was a grammar sym-
bol and state was a parser state. The modified parser replaces those pairs
with ⟨symbol, state, value⟩ triples, where value holds the entity assigned to
Parser generators differ in what value they
assign to a terminal symbol.
$$ in the reduction that shifted the triple onto the stack. Shift actions use the
value of the lexeme.

The second change causes the parser to invoke a function called Perform-

Actions before it reduces. The parser uses the result of that call in the value
field when it pushes the new triple onto the stack.

The parser generator constructs PerformActions from the translation actions
specified for each production in the grammar. The skeleton parser passes the
function a production number; the function consists of a case statement that
switches on that production number to the appropriate snippet of code for
the reduction.



push ⟨INVALID, INVALID, INVALID⟩ onto the stack

push ⟨start symbol, s0, INVALID⟩ onto the stack

word ← NextWord( )

while (true) do

state ← state from triple at top of stack

if Action[state,word] = “reduce A → β” then

value ← PerformActions(A → β)

pop |β| triples from the stack

state ← state from triple at top of stack

push ⟨A, Goto[state, A], value⟩ onto the stack

else if Action[state,word] = “shift si” then

push ⟨word, si, lexeme ⟩ onto the stack

word ← NextWord( )

else if Action[state,word] = “accept” and word = eof

then break

else throw a syntax error

report success /* executed the “accept” case */

■ FIGURE 5.6 The Skeleton LR(1) Parser with Translation Support.

The remaining detail is to translate the yacc-notation symbols $$, $1, $2, and
so on into concrete references into the stack. $$ represents the return value
for PerformActions. Any other symbol, $i, is a reference to the value field of
the triple corresponding to symbol i in the production’s RHS. Since those
triples appear, in right to left order, on the top of the stack, $i translates to
the value field for the triple located |β| − i slots from the top of the stack.

Handling Nonlocal Computation

The examples so far only show local computation in the grammar. Individ-
ual rules can only name symbols in the same production. Many of the tasks
in a compiler require information from other parts of the computation; in a
treewalk formulation, they need data from distant parts of the syntax tree.

One example of nonlocal computation in a compiler is the association of
Defining occurrence
The first occurrence of a name in a given
scope is its defining occurrence.

Any subsequent use is a reference occur-
rence.

type, lifetime, and visibility information with a named entity, such as a vari-
able, procedure, object, or structure layout. The compiler becomes aware
of the entity when it encounters the name for the first time in a scope—
the name’s defining occurrence. At the defining occurrence of a name x,
the compiler must determine x’s properties. At subsequent reference occur-
rences, the compiler needs access to those previously determined properties.

The kinds of rules introduced in the previous example provide a natu-
ral mechanism to pass information up the parse tree and to perform local



computation—between values associated with a node and its children. To
translate an expression such as x + y into a low-level three-address IR, the
compiler must access information that is distant in the parse tree—the dec-
larations of x and y. If the compiler tries to generate low-level three-address
code for the expression, it may also need access to information derived from
the syntax, such as a determination as to whether or not the code can keep x
in a register—that is, whether or not x is ambiguous. A common way to ad-
The use of a global symbol table to provide
nonlocal access is analogous to the use of
global variables in imperative programs.
dress this problem is to store information needed for nonlocal computations
in a globally accessible data structure. Most compilers use a symbol table
for this purpose (see Section 4.5).

The “symbol table” is actually a complex set of tables and search paths.
Conceptually, the reader can think of it as a hashmap tailored to each scope.
In a specific scope, the search path consists of an ordered list of tables that
the compiler will search to resolve a name.

Different parts of the grammar will manipulate the symbol table repre-
In a dynamically typed language such as
PYTHON, statements that define x may
change x’s attributes.
sentation. A name’s defining occurrence creates its symbol table entry. Its
declarations, if present, set various attributes and bindings. Each reference
occurrence will query the table to determine the name’s attributes. State-
ments that open a new scope, such as a procedure, a block, or a structure
declaration, will create new scopes and link them into the search path. More
subtle issues may arise; if a C program takes the address of a variable a, as
in &a, the compiler should mark a as potentially ambiguous.

The same trick, using a global variable to communicate information be-
tween the translation rules, arises in other contexts. Consider a source lan-
guage with a simple declaration syntax. The parser can create symbol-table
entries for each name and record their attributes as it processes the declara-
tions. For example, the source language might include syntax similar to the
following set of rules:

Declaration → TypeSpec NameList
{ CurType ← invalid; };

TypeSpec
→ int
{ CurType ← int; };
|
float
{ CurType ← float; };

NameList
→ NameList , name
{ err ← SetType($2,CurType); };
|
name
{ err ← SetType($1,CurType); };

where SetType creates a new entry for name if none exists and reports an
error if name exists and has a designated type other than CurType.

The type of the declared variables is determined in the productions for
TypeSpec. The action for TypeSpec records the type into a global variable,
CurType. When a name appears in the NameList production, the action sets
the name’s type to the value in CurType. The compiler writer has reached



SINGLE-PASS COMPILERS
In the earliest days of compilation, implementors tried to build single-pass
compilers—translators that would emit assembly code or machine code in a
single pass over the source program. At a time when fast computers were
measured in kiloflops, the efficiency of translation was an important issue.

To simplify single-pass translation, language designers adopted rules meant
to avoid the need for multiple passes. For example, PASCAL requires that all
declarations occur before any executable statement; this restriction allowed
the compiler to resolve names and perform storage layout before emitting
any code. In hindsight, it is unclear whether these restrictions were either
necessary or desirable.

Making multiple passes over the code allows the compiler to gather more
information and, in many cases, to generate more efficient code, as Floyd
observed in 1961 [160]. With today’s more complex processors, almost all
compilers perform multiple passes over an IR form of the code.

around the paradigm to pass information from the RHS of one production
to the RHS of another.

Form of the Grammar

The form of the grammar can play an important role in shaping the compu-
tation. To avoid the global variable CurType in the preceding example, the
compiler writer might reformulate the grammar for declaration syntax as
follows:

Declaration → int INameList
|
float FNameList

INameList
→ NameList name
{ err ← SetType($2, int); };
|
name
{ err ← SetType($1, int); };

FNameList
→ NameList name
{ err ← SetType($2, float); };
|
name
{ err ← SetType($1, float); };

This form of the grammar accepts the same language. However, it cre-
ates distinct name lists for int and float names, As shown, the compiler
writer can use these distinct productions to encode the type directly into the
syntax-directed action. This strategy simplifies the translation framework
and eliminates the use of a global variable to pass information between the
productions. The framework is easier to write, easier to understand, and,
likely, easier to maintain. Sometimes, shaping the grammar to the computa-
tion can simplify the syntax-driven actions.



Tailoring Expressions to Context

A more subtle form of nonlocal computation can arise when the compiler
writer needs to make a decision based on information in multiple produc-
tions. For example, consider the problem of extending the framework in
Fig. 5.5 so that it can emit an immediate multiply operation (multI in ILOC)
when translating an expression. In a single-pass compiler, for example, it
might be important to emit the multI in the initial IR.

For the expression a × 2, the framework in Fig. 5.5 would produce something
loadI
2
⇒ ri
mult
ra, ri
⇒ rj

ILOC Code for a × 2
similar to the code shown in the margin. (The code assumes that a resides
in ra.) The reduction by Factor → number emits the loadI; it executes before
the reduction by Term → Term × Factor.

To recognize the opportunity for a multI, the compiler writer would need
to add code to the action for Term → Term × Factor that recognizes when
$3 contains a small integer constant and generates the multI in that case.
The commutative case would require a similar check on $1. Even with this
effort, the loadI would remain. Subsequent optimization could remove it
(see Section 10.2).

The fundamental problem is that the actions in our syntax-driven translation
can only access local information because they can only name symbols in
the current production. That structure forces the translation to emit the loadI
before it can know that the value’s use occurs in an operation that has an
“immediate” variant.

The obvious suggestion is to refactor the grammar to reflect the multI case.
Term
→
Term × ( Expr )

|
Term × number
|
Term × name
If the compiler writer rewrites Term → Term × Factor with the three produc-
tions shown in the margin, then she can emit a multI in the action for
Term → Term × number, which will catch the case a × 2. It will not, how-
ever, catch the case 2 × a. Forward substitution on the left operand will not
work, because the grammar is left recursive. At best, forward substitution
can expose either an immediate left operand or an immediate right operand.

The most comprehensive solution to this problem is to create the more
general multiply operation and allow either subsequent optimization or in-
struction selection to discover the opportunity and rewrite the code. Either
of the techniques for instruction selection described in Chapter 11 can dis-
cover the opportunity for multI and rewrite the code accordingly.

If the compiler must generate the multI early, the most rational approach
Peephole optimization
an optimization that applies pattern match-
ing to simplify code in a small buffer
is to have the compiler maintain a small buffer of three to four operations
and to perform peephole optimization as it emits the initial IR (see Sec-
tion 11.3.1). It can easily detect and rewrite inefficiencies such as this one.



1
Stmt
→
if Expr then Stmt

2
|
if Expr then WithElse else Stmt

3
|
Other

4
WithElse
→
if Expr then WithElse else WithElse

5
|
Other

■ FIGURE 5.7 The Unambiguous If-Then-Else Grammar.

5.3.3 Translating Control-Flow Statements

As we have seen, the IR for expressions follows closely from the syntax for
expressions, which leads to straightforward translation schemes. Control-
flow statements, such as nested if–then–else constructs or loops, can re-
quire more complex representations.

Building an AST

The parser can build an AST to represent control-flow constructs in a natural
way. Consider a nest of if–then–else constructs, using the grammar from
Fig. 5.7. The AST can use a node with three children to represent the if.
One child holds the control expression; another holds the statements in the
then clause; the third holds the statements in the else clause. The drawing
in the margin shows the AST for the input:

if e1 then if e2 then s1 else s2

The actions to build this AST are straightforward.

Building Three-Address Code

To translate an if–then–else construct into three-address code, the compiler
must encode the transfers of control into a set of labels, branches, and jumps.
The three-address IR resembles the obvious assembly code for the construct:

1. evaluate the control expression;
2. branch to the then subpart (s1) or the else subpart (s2) as appropriate;
3. at the end of the selected subpart, jump to the start of the statement that
follows the if–then–else construct—the “exit.”

This translation scheme requires labels for the then part, the else part, and
the exit, along with a branch and two jumps.

Production 4 in the grammar from Fig. 5.7 shows the issues that arise in
a translation scheme to emit ILOC-like code for an if–then–else. Other
productions will generate the IR to evaluate the Expr and to implement the



WithElse
→
if Expr CreateBranch

then WithElse ToExit1

else WithElse ToExit2

CreateBranch
→
ϵ

ToExit1
→
ϵ

ToExit2
→
ϵ

■ FIGURE 5.8 Creating Mid-Production Actions.

then and else parts. The scheme for rule 4 must combine these disjoint parts
into code for a complete if–then–else.

The complication with rule 4 lies in the fact that the parser needs to emit
IR at several different points: after the Expr has been recognized, after the
WithElse in the then part has been recognized, and after the WithElse in the
else part has been recognized. In a straightforward rule set, the action for
rule 4 would execute after all three of those subparts have been parsed and
the IR for their evaluation has been created.

The scheme for rule 4 must have several different actions, triggered at dif-
ferent points in the rule. To accomplish this goal, the compiler writer can
modify the grammar in a way that creates reductions at the points in the
parse where the translation scheme needs to perform some action.

Fig. 5.8 shows a rewritten version of production 4 that creates reductions
at the critical points in the parse of a nested if–then–else construct. It
introduces three new nonterminal symbols, each defined by an epsilon
production.

The reduction for CreateBranch can create the three labels, insert the condi-
The compiler could omit the code for
ToExit2 and rely on the fall-through case
of the branch.

Making the branch explicit rather than
implicit gives later passes more freedom to
reorder the code (see Section 8.6.2).

tional branch, and insert a nop with the label for the then part. The reduction
for ToExit1 inserts a jump to the exit label followed by a nop with the label
for the else part. Finally, ToExit2 inserts a jump to the exit label followed by
a nop with the exit label.

One final complication arises. The compiler writer must account for nested
constructs. The three labels must be stored in a way that both ties them to
this specific instance of a WithElse and makes them accessible to the other
actions associated with rule 4. Our notation, so far, does not provide a solu-
tion to this problem. The bison parser generator extended yacc notation to
solve it, so that the compiler writer does not need to introduce an explicit
stack of label-valued triples.

The bison solution is to allow an action between any two symbols on the
production’s RHS. It behaves as if bison inserts a new nonterminal at the



point of the action, along with an ϵ-production for the new nonterminal. It
then associates the action with this new ϵ-production. The compiler writer
must count carefully; the presence of a mid-production action creates an
extra name and increments the names of symbols to its right.

Using this scheme, the mid-production actions can access the stack slot as-
sociated with any symbol in the expanded production, including the symbol
on the LHS of rule 4. In the if–then–else scenario, the action between Expr
and then can store a triple of labels temporarily in the stack slot for that LHS,

$$. The actions that follow the two WithElse clauses can then find the labels
that they need in $$. The result is not elegant, but it creates a workaround to
allow slightly nonlocal access.

Case statements and loops present similar problems. The compiler needs
to encode the control-flow of the original construct into a set of labels,
branches, and jumps. The parse stack provides a natural way to keep track
of the information for nested control-flow structures.

SECTION REVIEW
As part of translation, the compiler produces an IR form of the code. To
support that initial translation, parser generators provide a facility to specify
syntax-driven computations that tie computation to the underlying
grammar. The parser then sequences those actions based on the actual
syntax of the input program.

Syntax-driven translation creates an efficient mechanism for IR generation.
It easily accommodates decisions that require either local knowledge or
knowledge from earlier in the parse. It cannot make decisions based on
facts that appear later in the parse. Such decisions require multiple passes
over the IR to refine and improve the code.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
The grammar in the margin defines the syntax of a simple four-function
calculator. The calculator displays its current result on each reduction
to Expr or Term. Write the actions for a syntax-driven scheme to evaluate
expressions with this grammar.

2.
Consider the grammar from Fig. 5.7. Write a set of translation rules to
build an AST for an if-then-else construct.

Expr
→
Expr + Term
|
Expr - Term
|
Term

Term
→
Term × number
|
Term ÷ number
|
number

Simple Calculator Grammar



5.4 MODELING THE NAMING ENVIRONMENT

Modern programming languages allow the programmer to create complex
name spaces. Most languages support some variant of a lexical naming hier-
archy, where visibility, type, and lifetime are expressed in relationship to the
structure of the program. Many languages also support an object-oriented
naming hierarchy, where visibility and type are relative to inheritance and
lifetimes are governed by explicit or implicit allocation and deallocation.
During translation, optimization, and code generation, the compiler needs
mechanisms to model and understand these hierarchies.

When the compiler encounters a name, its syntax-driven translation rules
must map that name to a specific entity, such as a variable, object, or pro-
cedure. That name-to-entity binding plays a key role in translation, as it
establishes the name’s type and access method, which, in turn, govern the
code that the compiler can generate. The compiler uses its model of the
name space to determine this binding—a process called name resolution.

A program’s name space can contain multiple subspaces, or scopes. As de-
Static binding
When the compiler can determine the
name-to-entity binding, we consider that
binding to be static, in that it does not
change at runtime.

Dynamic binding
When the compiler cannot determine the
name-to-entity binding and must defer that
resolution until runtime, we consider that
binding to be dynamic.

fined in Chapter 4, a scope is a region in the program that demarcates a
name space. Inside a scope, the programmer can define new names. Names
are visible inside their scope and, generally, invisible outside their scope.

The primary mechanism used to model the naming environment is a set of
tables, collectively referred to as the symbol table. The compiler builds these
tables during the initial translation. For names that are bound statically, it
annotates references to the name with a specific symbol table reference. For
names that are bound dynamically, such as a C++ virtual function, it must
make provision to resolve that binding at runtime. As the parse proceeds,
the compiler creates, modifies, and discards parts of this model.

Before discussing the mechanism to build and maintain the visibility model,
a brief review of scope rules is in order.

5.4.1 Lexical Hierarchies

Most programming languages provide nested lexical scopes in some form.
Lexical scope
Scopes that nest in the order that they are
encountered in the program are often called
lexical scopes.

The general principle behind lexical scope rules is simple:

At a point p in a program, an occurrence of name n refers to the
entity named n that was created, explicitly or implicitly, in the scope
that is lexically closest to p.

Thus, if n is used in the current scope, it refers to the n declared in the current
scope, if one exists. If not, it refers to the declaration of n that occurs in the



CREATING A NEW NAME
Programming languages differ in the way that the programmer declares
names. Some languages require a declaration for each named variable and
procedure. Others determine the attributes of a name by applying rules in
place at the name’s defining occurrence. Still others rely on context to infer
the name’s attributes.

The treatment of a defining occurrence of some name x in scope S depends
on the source language’s visibility rules and the surrounding context.

■
If x occurs in a declaration statement, then the attributes of x in S are
obvious and well-defined.

■
If x occurs as a reference and an instance of x is visible in a scope that
surrounds S, most languages bind x to that entity.

■
If x occurs as a reference and no instance of x is visible, then treatment
varies by language. APL, PYTHON and even FORTRAN create a new
entity. C treats the reference as an error.

When the compiler encounters a defining occurrence, it must create the
appropriate structures to record the name and its attributes and to make the
name visible to name lookups.

closest enclosing scope. The outermost scope typically contains names that
are visible throughout the entire program, usually called global names.

Programming languages differ in the ways that they demarcate scopes. PAS-
CAL marks a scope with a begin–end pair. C defines a scope between each
pair of curly braces, { and }. Structure and record definitions create a scope
that contains their element names. Class definitions in an OOL create a new
scope for names visible in the class.

To make the discussion concrete, consider the PASCAL program shown in
PASCAL uses curly braces as the comment
delimiter.
Fig. 5.9. It contains five distinct scopes, one for each procedure: Main, Fee,
Fie, Foe, and Fum. Each procedure declares some variables drawn from the
set of names x, y, and z. In the code, each name has a subscript to indicate
its level number. Names declared in a procedure always have a level that is
one more than the level of the procedure name. Thus, Main has level 0, and
the names x, y, z, Fee, and Fie, all declared directly in Main, have level 1.

To represent names in a lexically scoped language, the compiler can use the
Static coordinate
For a name x declared in scope s, its static
coordinate is a pair ⟨l,o⟩ where l is the
lexical nesting level of s and o is the offset
where x is stored in the scope’s data area.

static coordinate for each name. The static coordinate is a pair ⟨l,o⟩, where
l is the name’s lexical nesting level and o is the its offset in the data area for
level l. The compiler obtains the static coordinate as part of the process of
name resolution—mapping the name to a specific entity.



■ FIGURE 5.9 Nested Lexical Scopes in PASCAL.

Modeling Lexical Scopes

As the parser works its way through the input code, it must build and main-
tain a model of the naming environment. The model changes as the parser
enters and leaves individual scopes. The compiler’s symbol table instanti-
ates that model.

The compiler can build a separate table for each scope, as shown in
Fig. 5.10. Panel (a) shows an outer scope J that contains two inner scopes.



■ FIGURE 5.10 Tables for the Lexical Hierarchy.

In scope K, a and b have type int while c and d have type char. In scope L,
a and c have type int while b and d have type float.

Panel (b) shows the corresponding symbol tables. The table for a scope
Scopes K and L are both nested inside scope
J. Scopes K and L are otherwise unrelated.
consists of both a hash table and a link to the surrounding scope. The gray
arrows depict the search path, which reflects nesting in the code. Thus, a
lookup of a in scope K would fail in the table for K, then follow the link to
scope J, where it would find the definition of a as an int.

This approach lets the compiler create flexible, searchable models for the
naming environment in each scope. A search path is just a list or chain of
tables that specifies the order in which the tables will be searched. At com-
pile time, a lookup for name resolution begins with the search path for the
current scope and proceeds up the chain of surrounding scopes. Because
the relationship between scopes is static (unchanging), the compiler can
build scope-specific search paths with syntax-driven translation and pre-
serve those tables and paths for use in later stages of the compiler and, if
needed, in other tools.

Building the Model

The compiler writer can arrange to build the name-space model during
syntax-driven translation. The source language constructs that enter and
leave distinct scopes can trigger actions to create tables and search paths.
The productions for declarations and references can create and refine the
entries for names.

■
Block Demarcations such as begin and end, { and }, and procedure entry
and exit, create a new table on entry to the scope and link it to the start
of the search path for the block(s) associated with the current scope. On
exit, the action should mark the table as final.



DYNAMIC SCOPING
The alternative to lexical scoping is dynamic scoping. The distinction
between lexical and dynamic scoping only matters when a procedure refers
to a variable that is declared outside the procedure’s own scope, sometimes
called a free variable.

With lexical scoping, the rule is simple and consistent: a free variable is
bound to the declaration for its name that is lexically closest to the use. If the
compiler starts in the scope containing the use, and checks successive
surrounding scopes, the variable is bound to the first declaration that it finds.
The declaration always comes from a scope that encloses the reference.

With dynamic scoping, the rule is equally simple: a free variable is bound to
the variable by that name that was most recently created at runtime. Thus,
when execution encounters a free variable, it binds that free variable to the
most recent instance of that name. Early implementations created a runtime
stack of names on which every name was pushed as its defining occurrence
was encountered. To bind a free variable, the running code searched the
name stack from its top downward until a variable with the right name was
found. Later implementations are more efficient.

While many early Lisp systems used dynamic scoping, lexical scoping has
become the dominant choice. Dynamic scoping is easy to implement in an
interpreter and somewhat harder to implement efficiently in a compiler. It
can create bugs that are difficult to detect and hard to understand. Dynamic
scoping still appears in some languages; for example, Common Lisp still
allows the program to specify dynamic scoping.

■
Variable Declarations,
if they exist, create entries for the declared
names in the local table and populate them with the declared attributes.
If they do not exist, then attributes such as type must be inferred from
references. Some size information might be inferred from points where
aggregates are allocated.

■
References trigger a lookup along the search path for the current scope.
In a language with declarations, failure to find a name in the local table
causes a search through the entire search path. In a language without
declarations, the reference may create a local entity with that name; it
may refer to a name in a surrounding scope. The rules on implicit decla-
rations are language specific.

FORTRAN creates the name with default attributes based on the first
letter of the name. C looks for it in surrounding scopes and declares an
error if it is not found. PYTHON’s actions depend on whether the first
occurrence of the name in a scope is a definition or a use.



Examples

Lexical scope rules are generally similar across different programming lan-
guages. However, language designers manage to insert surprising and idio-
syncratic touches. The compiler writer must adapt the general translation
schemes described here to the specific rules of the source language.

C has a simple, lexically scoped name space. Procedure names and global
variables exist in the global scope. Each procedure creates its own local
scope for variables, parameters, and labels. C does not include nested pro-
cedures or functions, although some compilers, such as GCC, implement
this extension. Blocks, set off by { and }, create their own local scopes;
blocks can be nested.

The C keyword static both restricts a name’s visibility and specifies its
lifetime. A static global name is only visible inside the file that contains its
declaration. A static local name has local visibility. Any static name has
a global lifetime; that is, it retains its value across distinct invocations of the
declaring procedure.

SCHEME has scope rules that are similar to those in C. Almost all entities
in SCHEME reside in a single global scope. Entities can be data; they can
be executable expressions. System-provided functions, such as cons, live
alongside user-written code and data items. Code, which consists of an ex-
ecutable expression, can create private objects by using a let expression.
Nesting let expressions inside one another can create nested lexical scopes
of arbitrary depth.

PYTHON is an Algol-like language that eschews declarations. It supports
three kinds of scopes: a local function-specific scope for names defined in
a function; a global scope for names defined outside of any programmer-
supplied function; and a builtin scope for implementation-provided names
such as print. These scopes nest in that order: local embeds in global which
embeds in builtin. Functions themselves can nest, creating a hierarchy of
local scopes.

PYTHON does not provide type declarations. The first use of a name x in
a scope is its defining occurrence. If the first use assigns x a value, then it
binds x to a new local entity with its type defined by the assigned value. If
the first use refers to x’s value, then it binds x to a global entity; if no such
entity exists, then that defining use creates the entity. If the programmer
intends x to be global but needs to define it before using it, the programmer
can add a nonlocal declaration for the name, which ensures that x is in the
global scope.



TERMINOLOGY FOR OBJECT-ORIENTED LANGUAGES
The diversity of object-oriented languages has led to some ambiguity in the
terms that we use to discuss them. To make the discussion in this chapter
concrete, we will use the following terms:

Object
An object is an abstraction with one or more members. Those
members can be data items, code that manipulates those data items, or
other objects. An object with code members is a class. Each object has
internal state—data whose lifetimes match the object’s lifetime.

Class
A class is a collection of objects that all have the same abstract
structure and characteristics. A class defines the set of data members in
each instance of the class and defines the code members, or methods,
that are local to that class. Some methods are public, or externally visible,
while others are private, or invisible outside the class.

Inheritance
Inheritance is a relationship among classes that defines a
partial order on the name scopes of classes. A class a may inherit
members from its superclass. If a is the superclass of b, b is a subclass of a.
A name x defined in a subclass obscures any definitions of x in a
superclass. Some languages allow a class to inherit from multiple
superclasses.

Receiver
Methods are invoked relative to some object, called the
method’s receiver. The receiver is known by a designated name inside
the method, such as this or self.

The power of an OOL arises, in large part, from the organizational
possibilities presented by its multiple name spaces.

5.4.2 Inheritance Hierarchies

Object-oriented languages (OOLs) introduce a second form of nested name
space through inheritance. OOLs introduce classes. A class consists of a
collection (possibly empty) of objects that have the same structure and be-
havior. The class definition specifies the code and data members of an object
in the class.

Much of the power of an OOL derives from the ability to create new classes
Polymorphism
The ability of an entity to take on different
types is often called polymorphism.
by drawing on definitions of other existing classes. In JAVA terminology,
a new class β can extend an existing class α; objects of class β then in-
herit definitions of code and data members from the definition of α. β may
redefine names from α with new meanings and types; the new definitions
obscure earlier definitions in α or its superclasses. Other languages provide
similar functionality with a different vocabulary.



Class extension creates an inheritance hierarchy: if α is the superclass of β,
The terminology used to specify inheri-
tance varies across languages. In JAVA,
a subclass extends its superclass. In C++,
a subclass is derived from its superclass.

Subtype polymorphism
the ability of a subclass object to reference
superclass members

then any method defined in α must operate correctly on an object of class β,
provided that the method is visible in β. The converse is not true. A subclass
method may rely on subclass members that are not defined in instances of
the superclass; such a method cannot operate correctly on an object that is
an instance of the superclass.

In a single-inheritance language, such as JAVA, inheritance imposes a tree-
structured hierarchy on the set of classes. Other languages allow a class β to
have multiple immediate superclasses. This notion of “multiple inheritance”
gives the programmer an ability to reuse more code, but it creates a more
complex name resolution environment.

Each class definition creates a new scope. Names of code and data mem-
bers are specific to the class definition. Many languages provide an explicit
mechanism to control the visibility of member names. In some languages,
class definitions can contain other classes to create an internal lexical hi-
erarchy. Inheritance defines a second search path based on the superclass
relationship.

In translation, the compiler must map an ⟨object, member⟩ pair back to a
specific member declaration in a specific class definition. That binding pro-
vides the compiler with the type information and access method that it needs
to translate the reference. The compiler finds the object name in the lexical
hierarchy; that entry provides a class that serves as the starting point for the
compiler to search for the member name in the inheritance hierarchy.

Modeling Inheritance Hierarchies

To resolve member names, the compiler needs a model of the inheritance
The lexical hierarchy reflects nesting in the
syntax. The inheritance hierarchy is created
by definitions, not syntactic position.
hierarchy as defined by the set of class declarations. The compiler can
build a distinct table for the scope associated with each class as it parses
that class’ declaration. Source-language phrases that establish inheritance
cause the compiler to link class scopes together to form the hierarchy. In a
single-inheritance language, the hierarchy has a tree structure; classes are
children of their superclasses. In a multiple-inheritance language, the hier-
archy forms an acyclic graph.

The compiler uses the same tools to model the inheritance hierarchy that it
does to model the lexical hierarchy. It creates tables to model each scope. It
links those tables together to create search paths. The order in which those
searches occur depends on language-specific scope and inheritance rules.
The underlying technology used to create and maintain the model does not.



Compile-Time Versus Runtime Resolution

The major complication that arises with some OOLs derives not from the
Closed class structure
If the class structure of an application is
fixed at compile time, the OOL has a closed
hierarchy.

presence of an inheritance hierarchy, but rather from when that hierarchy
is defined. If the OOL requires that class definitions be present at compile
time and that those definitions cannot change, then the compiler can resolve
member names, perform appropriate type checking, determine appropriate
access methods, and generate code for member-name references. We say
that such a language has a closed class structure.

By contrast, if the language allows the running program to change its class
Open class structure
If an application can change its class struc-
ture at runtime, it has an open hierarchy.
structure, either by importing class definitions at runtime, as in JAVA, or by
editing class definitions, as in SMALLTALK, then the language may need
to defer some name resolution and binding to runtime. We say that such a
language has an open class structure.

Lookup with Inheritance

Assume, for the moment, a closed class structure. Consider two distinct
scenarios:

1. If the compiler finds a reference to an unqualified name n in some proce-
Qualified name
a multipart name, such as x.part, where
part is an element of an aggregate entity
named x

dure p, it searches the lexical hierarchy for n. If p is a method defined in
some class c, then n might also be a data member of c or some superclass
of c; thus, the compiler must insert part of the inheritance hierarchy into
the appropriate point in the search path.
2. If the compiler finds a reference to member m of object o, it first re-
solves o in the lexical hierarchy to an instance of some class c. Next, it
searches for m in the table for class c; if that search fails, it looks for m
in each table along c’s chain of superclasses (in order). It either finds m
or exhausts the hierarchy.

With an open class structure, the compiler may need to generate code that
One of the primary sources of opportunity
for just-in-time compilers is lowering the
costs associated with runtime name resolu-
tion.

causes some of this name resolution to occur at runtime, as occurs with
a virtual function in C++. In general, runtime name resolution replaces a
simple, often inexpensive, reference with a call to a more expensive runtime
support routine that resolves the name and provides the appropriate access
(read, write, or execute).

Building the Model

As the parser processes a class definition, it can (1) enter the class name
into the current lexical scope and (2) create a new table for the names de-
fined in the class. Since both the contents of the class and its inheritance
context are specified with syntax, the compiler writer can use syntax-driven



■ FIGURE 5.11 Tables for the Inheritance Hierarchy.

actions to build and populate the table and to link it into the surrounding in-
heritance hierarchy. Member names are found in the inheritance hierarchy;
unqualified names are found in the lexical hierarchy.

The compiler can use the symbol-table building blocks designed for lex-
ical hierarchies to represent inheritance hierarchies. Fig. 5.11 shows two
class definitions, one for Point and another for ColorPoint, which is a sub-
class of Point. The compiler can link these tables into a search path for the
inheritance hierarchy, shown in the figure as a SuperClass pointer. More
complicated situations, such as lexically nested class definitions, simply
produce more complex search paths.

Examples

Object-oriented languages differ in the vocabulary that they use and in the
object-models that they use.

C++ has a closed class structure. By design, method names can be bound
to implementations at compile time. C++ includes an explicit declaration to
force runtime binding—the C++ virtual function.

By contrast, JAVA has an open class structure, although the cost of changing
the class structure is high—the code must invoke the class loader to im-
port new class definitions. A compiler could, in principle, resolve method
names to implementations at startup and rebind after each invocation of the
class loader. In practice, most JAVA systems interpret bytecode and compile
frequently executed methods with a just-in-time compiler. This approach al-
lows high-quality code and late binding. If the class loader overwrites some



class definition that was used in an earlier JIT-compilation, it can force re-
compilation by invalidating the code for affected methods.

Multiple Inheritance

Some OOLs allow multiple inheritance. The language needs syntax that lets
Multiple inheritance
a feature that allows a class to inherit from
multiple immediate superclasses
a programmer specify that members a, b, and c inherit their definitions from
superclass x while members d and e inherit their definitions from super-
class y. The language must resolve or prohibit nonsensical situations, such
as a class that inherits multiple definitions of the same name.

To support multiple inheritance, the compiler needs a more complex model
of the inheritance hierarchy. It can, however, build an appropriate model
from the same building blocks: symbol tables and explicit search paths. The
complexity largely manifests itself in the search paths.

5.4.3 Visibility

Programming languages often provide explicit control over visibility—that
Visibility
A name is visible at point p if it can be
referenced at p.

Some languages provide ways to control a
name’s visibility.

is, where in the code a name can be defined or used. For example, C provides
limited visibility control with the static keyword. Visibility control arises
in both lexical and inheritance hierarchies.

C’s static keyword specifies both lifetime and visibility. A C static vari-
able has a lifetime of the entire execution and its visibility is restricted to
the current scope and any scopes nested inside the current scope. With a
declaration outside of any procedure, static limits visibility to code within
that file. (Without static, such a name would be visible throughout the pro-
gram.)

For a C static variable declared inside a procedure, the lifetime attribute of
static ensures that its value is preserved across invocations. The visibility
attribute of static has no effect, since the variable’s visibility was already
limited to the declaring procedure and any scopes nested inside it.

JAVA provides explicit control over visibility via the keywords public,
private, protected, and default.

public
A public method or data member is visible from anywhere in the
program.

private
A private method or data member is only visible within the class
that encloses it.

protected
A protected method or data member is visible within the class
that encloses it, in any other class declared in the same package, and in
any subclass declared in a different package.



default
A default method or data member is visible within the class that
encloses it and in any other class declared in the same package. If no
visibility is specified, the object has default visibility.

Neither private nor protected can be used on a declaration at the top level
of the hierarchy because they define visibility with respect to the enclosing
class; at the top level, a declaration has no enclosing class.

As the compiler builds the naming environment, it must encode the visibility
attributes into the name-space model. A typical implementation will include
a visibility tag in the symbol table record of each name. Those tags are
consulted in symbol table lookups.

As mentioned before, PYTHON determines a variable’s visibility based on
whether its defining occurrence is a definition or a use. (A use implies that
the name is global.) For objects, PYTHON provides no mechanism to con-
trol visibility of their data and code members. All attributes (data members)
and methods have global visibility.

5.4.4 Performing Compile-Time Name Resolution

During translation, the compiler often maps a name’s lexeme to a specific
entity, such as a variable, object, or procedure. To resolve a name’s identity,
the compiler uses the symbol tables that it has built to represent the lexical
and inheritance hierarchies. Language rules specify a search path through
these tables. The compiler starts at the innermost level of the search path. It
performs a lookup on each table in the path until it either finds the name or
fails in the outermost table.

The specifics of the path are language dependent. If the syntax of the name
indicates that it is an object-relative reference, then the compiler can start
with the table for the object’s class and work its way up the inheritance hi-
erarchy. If the syntax of the name indicates that it is an “ordinary” program
variable, then the compiler can start with the table for the scope in which
the reference appears and work its way up the lexical hierarchy. If the lan-
guage’s syntax fails to distinguish between data members of objects and or-
dinary variables, then the compiler must build some hybrid search path that
combines tables in a way that models the language-specified scope rules.

The compiler can maintain the necessary search paths with syntax-driven
actions that execute as the parser enters and leaves scopes, and as it en-
ters and leaves declarations of classes, structures, and other aggregates. The
details, of course, will depend heavily on the specific rules in the source
language being compiled.



SECTION REVIEW
Programming languages provide mechanisms to control the lifetime and
visibility of a name. Declarations allow explicit specification of a name’s
properties. The placement of a declaration in the code has a direct effect on
lifetime and visibility, as defined by the language’s scope rules. In an
object-oriented language, the inheritance environment also affects the
properties of a named entity.

To model these complex naming environments, compilers use two
fundamental tools: symbol tables and search paths that link tables together
in a hierarchical fashion. The compiler can use these tools to construct
context-specific search spaces that model the source-language rules.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Assume that the compiler builds a distinct symbol table and search
path for each scope. For a simple PASCAL-like language, what actions
should the parser take on entry to and exit from each scope?

2.
Using the table and search path model for name resolution, what is the
asymptotic cost of (a) resolving a local name? (b) resolving a nonlocal
name? (Assume that table lookup has a O(1) cost.) In programs that
you have written, how deeply have you nested scopes?

5.5 TYPE INFORMATION

In order to translate references into access methods, the compiler must know
Type
an abstract category that specifies properties
held in common by all members of the type

Common types include integer, character,
list, and function.

what the name represents. A source language name fee might be a small
integer; it might be a function of two character strings that returns a floating-
point number; it might be an object of class fum. Before the front end can
emit code to manipulate fee, it must know fee’s fundamental properties,
summarized as its type.

A type is just a collection of properties; all members of the type have the
same properties. For example, an integer might be defined as any whole
number i in the range −263 ≤ i < 263 − 1, or red might be a value in the
enumerated type colors defined as the set { red, yellow, blue }.

Types can be specified by rules; for example, the declaration of a structure
We represent the type of a structure as the
product of the types of its constituent fields,
in order.
in C defines a type. The structure’s type specifies the set of declared fields
and their order inside the structure; each field has its own type that specifies
its interpretation. Programming languages predefine some types, called base



types. Most languages allow the programmer to construct new types. The set
of types in a given language, along with the rules that use types to specify
program behavior, are collectively called a type system.

The type system allows both language designers and programmers to spec-
ify program behavior at a more precise level than is possible with a context-
free grammar. The type system creates a second vocabulary for describing
the behavior of valid programs. Consider, for example, the JAVA expression

a + b. The meaning of + depends on the types of a and b. If a and b are strings,
the + operator specifies concatenation. If a and b are numbers, the + operator
specifies addition, perhaps with implicit conversion to a common type. This
kind of overloading requires accurate type information.

5.5.1 Uses for Types in Translation

Types play a critical role in translation because they help the compiler un-
derstand the meaning and, thus, the implementation of the source code. This
knowledge, which is deeper than syntax, allows the compiler to detect er-
rors that might otherwise arise at runtime. In many cases, it also lets the
compiler generate more efficient code than would be possible without the
type information.

The compiler can use type information to ensure that operators and operands
Conformable
We will say that an operator and its
operands are conformable if the result of
applying the operator to those arguments is
well defined.

are conformable—that is, that the operator is well defined over the operands’
types (e.g., string concatenation might not be defined over real numbers). In
some cases, the language may require the compiler to insert code to convert
nonconformable arguments to conformable types—a process called implicit
conversion. In other cases (e.g., using a floating-point number as a pointer),
the language definition may disallow such conversion; the compiler should,
at a minimum, emit an informative error message to give the programmer
insight into the problem.

Type information can lead the compiler to translations that execute effi-
ciently. For example, in the expression ax, the types of a and x determine
how best to evaluate the expression. If x is a nonnegative integer, the com-
piler can generate a series of multiplications to evaluate ax. If, instead, x
is a real number or a negative number, the compiler may need to generate
If x is real but provably 2, there are less
expensive ways to compute ax than with
a Taylor series.
code that uses a more complex evaluation scheme, such as a Taylor-series
expansion. (The more complicated form might be implemented via a call to
a support library.) Similarly, languages that allow whole structure or whole
array assignment rely on conformability checking to let the compiler imple-
ment these constructs in an efficient way.



if (tag(a) = tag(b)) then // take the short path

switch (tag(a)) into {

case SHORT:
// use SHORT add

value(c) ← value(a) + value(b)

tag(c) ← SHORT

break

case INTEGER: // use INTEGER add

value(c) ← value(a) + value(b)

tag(c) ← INTEGER

break

case LONG INTEGER: // use LONG INTEGER add

value(c) ← value(a) + value(b)

tag(c) ← LONG INTEGER

break

}

else
// take the long path

(c, tag(c)) ← AddMixedTypes(a, tag(a), b, tag(b))

■ FIGURE 5.12 Integer Addition with Runtime Type Checking.

At a larger scale, type information plays an important enabling role in mod-
Type signature
a specification of the types of the formal
parameters and return value(s) of a function

Function prototype
The C language includes a provision that
lets the programmer declare functions that
are not present. The programmer includes
a skeleton declaration, called a function
prototype.

ular programming and separate compilation. Modular programming creates
the opportunity for a programmer to mis-specify the number and types of
arguments to a function that is implemented in another file or module. If
the language requires that the programmer provide a type signature for any
externally defined function (essentially, a C function prototype), then the
compiler can check the actual arguments against the type signature.

Type information also plays a key role in garbage collection (see Sec-
tion 6.6.2). It allows the runtime collector to understand the size of each
entity on the heap and to understand which fields in the object are pointers
to other, possibly heap-allocated, entities. Without type information, col-
lected at compile time and preserved for the collector, the collector would
need to conservatively assume that any field might be a pointer and apply
runtime range and alignment tests to exclude out-of-bounds values.

Lack of Type Information

If type information is not available during translation, the compiler may
Complete type information might be un-
available due to language design or due to
late binding.
need to emit code that performs type checking and code selection at runtime.
Each entity of unknown type would need a runtime tag to hold its type.
Instead of emitting a simple operator, the compiler would need to generate
case logic based on the operand types, both to perform tag generation and
to manipulate the values and tags.



Fig. 5.12 uses pseudocode to show what the compiler might generate for ad-
dition with runtime checking and conversion. It assumes three types, SHORT,

INTEGER, and LONG INTEGER. If the operands have the same type, the code
selects the appropriate version of the addition operator, performs the arith-
metic, and sets the tag. If the operands have distinct types, it invokes a
library routine that performs the complete case analysis, converts operands
appropriately, adds the converted operands, and returns the result and its tag.

By contrast, of course, if the compiler had complete and accurate type in-
formation, it could generate code to perform both the operation and any
necessary conversions directly. In that situation, runtime tags and the asso-
ciated tag-checking would be unnecessary.

5.5.2 Components of a Type System

A type system has four major components: a set of base types, or built-in
types; rules to build new types from existing types; a method to determine
if two types are equivalent; and rules to infer the type of a source-language
expression.

Base Types

Most languages include base types for some, if not all, of the following
kinds of data: numbers, characters, and booleans. Most processors provide
direct support for these kinds of data, as well. Numbers typically come in
The size of a “word” may vary across im-
plementations and processors.
several formats, such as integer and floating point, and multiple sizes, such
as byte, word, double word, and quadruple word.

Individual languages add other base types. LISP includes both a ratio-
nal number type and a recursive-list type. Rational numbers are, essen-
tially, pairs of integers interpreted as a ratio. A list is either the desig-
nated value nil or a list built with the constructor cons; the expression

(cons first rest) is an ordered list where first is an object and rest is
a list.

Languages differ in their base types and the operators defined over those
base types. For example, C and C++ have many varieties of integers;

long int and unsigned long int have the same length, but support differ-
ent ranges of integers. PYTHON has multiple string classes that provide a
broad set of operations; by contrast, C has no string type so programmers
use arrays of characters instead. C provides a pointer type to hold an arbi-
trary memory address; JAVA provides a more restrictive model of reference
types.



Compound and Constructed Types

The base types of a programming language provide an abstraction for the
Some languages provide higher-level
abstractions as base types, such as
PYTHON maps.
actual kinds of data supported by the processor. However, the base types are
often inadequate to represent the information domain that the programmer
needs—abstractions such as graphs, trees, tables, records, objects, classes,
lists, stacks, and maps. These higher-level abstractions can be implemented
as collections of multiple entities, each with its own type.

The ability to construct new types to represent compound or aggregate ob-
In an OOL, classes can be treated as con-
structed types. Inheritance defines a subtype
relationship, or specialization.
jects is an essential feature of many languages. Typical constructed types
include arrays, strings, enumerated types, and structures or records. Com-
pound types let the programmer organize information in novel, program-
specific ways. Constructed types allow the language to express higher-level
operations, such as whole-structure assignment. They also improve the com-
piler’s ability to detect ill-formed programs.

Arrays

Arrays are among the most widely used aggregate objects. An array groups
together multiple objects of the same type and gives each a distinct name—
albeit an implicit, computed name rather than an explicit, programmer-
designated name. The C declaration int a[100][200]; sets aside space for
100 × 200 = 20,000 integers and ensures that they can be addressed using
the name a. The references a[1][17] and a[2][30] access distinct and in-
dependent memory locations. The essential property of an array is that the
program can compute names for each of its elements by using numbers (or
some other ordered, discrete type) as subscripts.

Support for operations on arrays varies widely. FORTRAN 90, PL/I, and
Array conformability
Two arrays a and b are conformable with
respect to some array operator if the di-
mensions of a and b make sense with the
operator.

Matrix multiply, for example, imposes
different conformability requirements than
does matrix addition.

APL all support assignment of whole or partial arrays. These languages
support element-by-element application of arithmetic operations to arrays.
For conformable arrays x, y, and z, the statement x = y + z would overwrite
each x[i,j] with y[i,j] + z[i,j]. APL takes the notion of array operations
further than most languages; it includes operators for inner product, outer
product, and several kinds of reductions. For example, the sum reduction of
y, written x ← +/y, assigns x the scalar sum of the elements of y.

An array can be viewed as a constructed type because it is specified with
the type of its elements. Thus, a 10 × 10 array of integers has type two-
dimensional array of integers. Some languages include the array’s dimen-
sions in its type; thus, a 10 × 10 array of integers has a different type than a
12 × 12 array of integers. This approach makes array operations where the
operands have incompatible dimensions into type errors; thus, they are de-
tected and reported in a systematic way. Most languages allow arrays of



any base type; some languages allow arrays of constructed types, such as
structures, as well.

Strings

Support for strings varies across languages. Some languages, such as

PYTHON or PL/I, support multiple kinds of strings with similar properties,
attributes, and operations. Others, such as FORTRAN or C, simply treat a
string as a vector of characters.

A true string type differs from an array type in several important ways.
Operations that make sense on strings, such as concatenation, translation,
and computing string length, may not have analogs for arrays. The standard
comparison operators can be overloaded so that string comparisons work in
the natural way: "a" < "boo" and "fee" < "fie". Implementing a similar
comparison for arrays of characters suggests application of the idea to ar-
rays of numbers or structures, where the analogy may not hold. Similarly,
the actual length of a string may differ from its allocated size, while most
applications of an array use all the allocated elements.

Enumerated Types

Many languages let the programmer construct a type that contains a specific
set of constant values. An enumerated type lets the programmer use self-
documenting names for small sets of constants. Classic examples include
the days of the week and the months of the year. In C syntax, these might
be written

enum WeekDay { Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday};

enum Month
{ January, February, March, April,
May, June, July, August, September,
October, November, December};

The compiler maps each element of an enumerated type to a distinct value.
The elements of an enumerated type are ordered, so comparisons between
elements of the same type make sense. In the examples, Monday < Tuesday
and June < July. Operations that compare different enumerated types make
no sense—for example, Tuesday > September should produce a type error.

PASCAL ensures that each enumerated type behaves as if it were a subrange
of the integers. For example, the programmer can declare an array indexed
by the elements of an enumerated type.



Structures and Variants

Structures, or records, group together multiple objects of arbitrary type. The
elements of the structure are typically given explicit names. For example,
a programmer implementing a parse tree in C might need nodes with both
one and two children.

struct N1 {
int
Operator;
int
Value;
union Node *left;
};

struct N2 {
int
Operator;
int
Value;
union Node *left;
union Node *right;
};

union Node {
struct N1 one;
struct N2 two;
};

The type of a structure is the ordered product of the types of the elements
that it contains. We might describe N1 and N2 as:

N1:
int × int× (Node *)
N2:
int × int× (Node *)× (Node *)

These new types should have the same essential properties that a base type
has. In C, autoincrementing a pointer to an N1 or casting a pointer into an
(N1 *) has the desired effect—the behavior is analogous to what happens for
a base type.

The example creates a new type, Node, that is a structure of either type N1
or type N2. Thus, the pointer in an N1 node can reference either an N1 node
or an N2 node. PASCAL creates unions with variant records. C uses a union.
The type of a union is the alternation of its component types; thus, Node has
type N1 ∪ N2.

Between them, the language and the runtime need a mechanism to dis-
ambiguate references. One solution is fully qualified references as in

p→Node.N1.Value versus p→Node.N2.Value. Alternatively, the language
might adopt PASCAL’s strategy and require runtime tags for variant records,
with explicit checks for the tags at runtime.

Objects and Classes

In an object-oriented language, classes define both the content and form
of objects, and they define the inheritance hierarchy that is used to resolve
object-relative references. In implementation, however, an object looks like
a record or structure whose organization is specified by the class definition.



AN ALTERNATIVE VIEW OF STRUCTURES
The classical view of structures treats each kind of structure as a distinct type.
This approach to structure types follows the treatment of other aggregates,
such as arrays and strings. It seems natural. It makes distinctions that are
useful to the programmer. For example, a tree node with two children
probably should have a different type than a tree node with three children;
presumably, they are used in different situations. A program that assigns a
three-child node to a two-child node should generate a type error and a
warning message to the programmer.

From the runtime system’s perspective, however, treating each structure as a
distinct type complicates matters. With distinct structure types, the heap
contains a set of objects drawn from an arbitrary set of types. This makes it
difficult to reason about programs that deal directly with the objects on the
heap, such as a garbage collector. To simplify such programs, their authors
sometimes take a different approach to structure types.

This alternate model considers all structures in the program as a single type.
Individual structure declarations each create a variant form of the type
structure. The type structure, itself, is the union of all these variants. This
approach lets the program view the heap as a collection of objects of a
single type, rather than a collection of many types. This view makes code
that manipulates the heap simpler to analyze and optimize.

Type Equivalence

The compiler needs a mechanism to determine if two constructed types are
struct Tree {
int value;
struct Tree *left;
struct Tree *right;
}

struct Bush {
int value;
struct Bush *left;
struct Bush *right;
}

equivalent. (The answer is obvious for base types.) Consider the C structure
declarations shown in the margin. Are Tree and Bush the same type? Are
they equivalent? Any language that includes constructed types needs an un-
ambiguous rule to answer this question. Historically, languages have taken
one of two approaches.

1. Name Equivalence asserts that two types are equivalent if and only if
the programmer calls them by the same name. This approach assumes
that naming is an intentional act and that the programmer uses names to
impart meaning.
2. Structural Equivalence asserts that two types are equivalent if and only
if they have the same structure. This approach assumes that structure
matters and that names may not.

Tree and Bush have structural equivalence but not name equivalence.

Each approach has its adherents and its detractors. However, the choice be-
tween them is made by the language designer, not the compiler writer. The



Production
Syntax-Driven Action

Expr
→ Expr + Term
{ set_type($$, F+(type($1),type($3))); };

|
Expr − Term
{ set_type($$, F−(type($1),type($3))); };

|
Term
{ set_type($$,type($1)); };

Term
→ Term × Factor
{ set_type($$, F×(type($1),type($3))); };

|
Term ÷ Factor
{ set_type($$, F÷(type($1),type($3))); };

|
Factor
{ set_type($$,type($1)); };

Factor → ( Expr )
{ set_type($$,type($2)); };

|
num
{ set_type($$,type(num)); };

|
name
{ set_type($$,type(name)); };

■ FIGURE 5.13 Framework to Assign Types to Subexpressions.

compiler writer must implement an appropriate representation for the type
and an appropriate equivalence test.

5.5.3 Type Inference for Expressions

The compiler must assign, to each expression and subexpression, a specific
type. The simplest expressions, names and nums, have well defined types.
For expressions computed from references, the compiler must infer the type
from the combination of the operation and the types of its operands.

The relationship between operator, operand types, and result type must be
specified for the compiler to infer expression types. Conceptually, we can
think of the relationship as a recursive function over the tree; in practice, the
rules vary from simple and obvious to arcane. The digression on page 248
describes the rules for expressions in C++. Because C++ has so many base
types, its rules are voluminous.

The result type of an expression depends on the operator and the types of
its operands. The compiler could assign types in a bottom-up walk over an
expression tree. At each node, it would set the node’s type from the type of
its operator and its children. Alternatively, the compiler could assign types
as part of its syntax-driven framework for translation.

Fig. 5.13 sketches the actions necessary to assign types to subexpressions
in a syntax-driven framework. It assumes that the type-function for an op-
erator α is given by a function Fα. Thus, the type of a multiplication is just
F×(t1, t2), where t1 and t2 are the types of the left and right operands of ×.
Of course, the compiler writer would likely pass a structured value on the
stack, so the references to $$, $1, and $3 would be more complex.



NUMERICAL CONVERSIONS IN C++
C++, as defined in the ISO 2017 standard, has a large and complex set of
conversion rules [212]. Here is a simplified version of the promotion and
conversion rules for numerical values.

Integral Promotion:
A character value or a value in an untyped
enumeration can be promoted to the first integer type that will hold all
of its values. The integer types, in order, are: int, unsigned int, long int,
unsigned long int, long long int, and unsigned long long int. (For a
typed enumeration, conversion is legal only if the underlying type
converts to integer.)

Floating-Point Promotion:
A float value can be promoted to type
double.

Integer Conversions:
A value of an integer type can be converted to
another integer type, as can a value of an enumeration type. For an
unsigned destination type, the result is the smallest unsigned integer
congruent to the source value. For a signed destination type, the value is
unchanged if it fits in the destination type, otherwise the result is
implementation-defined.

Floating-Point Conversions:
A value of floating-point type can be
converted to another floating-point type. If the destination type can
exactly represent the source value, the result is that value. Otherwise it is
an implementation-defined choice between the two adjacent values.

Boolean Conversion:
A numerical value, enumeration value, or pointer
value can be converted to a value of type bool. A value of zero, a null
pointer, or a null member pointer all convert to false; any other value
converts to true.

The compiler tries to convert the source value to the destination type, which
may involve both a promotion and a conversion.

In a language with more complex inference rules, the compiler might build
an IR that has incomplete type information and perform one or more passes
over the IR to assign types to subexpressions.

The Role of Declarations

Programming languages differ on whether or not they require declarations.
In a language with mandatory declarations, the declarations establish a con-
crete type for every named entity; those types serve, in turn, as the initial
information for type inference. In a language without declarations, such as

PYTHON or LISP, the compiler must infer types for values from the context
in which they appear in the code. For example, the assignment fee ← ’a’



might imply that fee has a type that can hold a single character, while
This example assumes the C convention
of single quotes for characters and double
quotes for strings.
fee ← "a" implies that fee can hold a character string.

Programming languages also differ on where in the code a declaration must
appear. Many languages have a “declare before use” rule; any name must be
declared before it appears in the executable code. This rule facilitates type-
checking during the parser’s translation into an initial IR form. Languages
that do not require declaration before use force the compiler to build an
initial IR that abstracts away details of type, and to subsequently perform
type inference and checking on that abstract IR so that the compiler can
refine operators and references to reflect the correct type information.

Mixed-Type Expressions

Programming languages differ on the extent to which they expect the com-
piler to insert type conversions when the code specifies an expression with
types that are not directly compatible. For example, an expression a × b may
be defined for the case when a and b are both integers or both floating-point
numbers, but not when a is an integer and b is a floating-point number. The
language may require the compiler to report an error; alternatively, it might
require the compiler to insert a conversion. Section 7.2.2 discusses the im-
plementation of implicit conversions.

For example, ANSI C++ supports multiple kinds of integers that differ in the
range of numbers that each can represent. The language definition requires
that the compiler insert code to convert between these representations; the
definition specifies the behavior with a set of rules. Its rules specify the
conversions for the division of an integer by a floating-point number and
forbid division by a character string.

Interprocedural Aspects of Type Inference

Type inference for expressions depends, inherently, on the other procedures
that form the executable program. In even the simplest type systems, expres-
sions contain function calls. The compiler must check each of those calls. It
must ensure the type compatibility of each actual parameter with the corre-
sponding formal parameter. It must determine the type of the returned value
for use in further inference.

To analyze and understand procedure calls, the compiler needs a type signa-
ture for each function. For example, in C’s standard library, strlen computes
a character string’s length. Its function prototype is:

unsigned int strlen(const char *s);



This prototype asserts that strlen takes an argument of type char *. The
const attribute indicates that strlen does not modify s. It returns a nonneg-
ative integer. The type signature might be written:

strlen : const char * → unsigned int

which we read as “strlen is a function that takes a constant-valued character
string and returns an unsigned integer.”

As a second example, filter in SCHEME has the type signature:

filter: (α → boolean) × list of α → list of α

That is, filter is a function of two arguments. The first should be a function
filter returns a list that contains every
element of the input list for which the input
function returns true.
that maps some type α into a boolean, written (α → boolean), and the second
should be a list whose elements are of the same type α. Given arguments of
those types, filter returns a list whose elements have type α. The function
filter exhibits parametric polymorphism: its result type is a function of its
argument types.

To perform accurate type inference, the compiler needs a type signature for
every function. It can obtain that information in several ways. The compiler
can require that the entire program be present for compilation, eliminating
separate compilation. The compiler can require a type signature for each
function, typically done with mandatory function prototypes. The compiler
can defer type checking until link time or runtime, when such information is
available. Finally, the compiler writer can embed the compiler in a program-
development system that gathers the requisite information. Each of these
approaches has been used in real systems.

SECTION REVIEW
A type represents a set of properties common to all values of that type.
A type system assigns a type to each value in a program. Programming
languages use types to define legal and illegal behavior. A good type
system can increase language expressiveness, expose subtle errors, and let
the compiler avoid runtime type checks.

A type system consists of a set of base types, rules to construct new types
from existing ones, a method to determine the equivalence of two types,
and rules to infer the type of an expression. The notions of base types,
constructed types, and type equivalence should be familiar from most
high-level languages.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
For your favorite programming language, what are its base types? Is
there a mechanism to build an aggregate type? Does it provide a mech-
anism for creating a procedure that takes a variable number of argu-
ments, such as printf in the C standard I/O library?

2.
Type safety at procedure calls is often based on the use of prototypes—
a declaration of the procedure’s arguments and return values. Sketch a
mechanism that could ensure the validity of those function prototypes.

Hint: It may require interaction with the
linker or the runtime system.

5.6 STORAGE LAYOUT

Given a model of the name space and type information for each named en-
tity, the compiler can perform storage layout. The process has two steps.
First, the compiler must assign each entity to a logical data area. This deci-
sion depends on both the entity’s lifetime and its visibility. Second, for each
logical data area, the compiler assigns each entity in that area an offset from
the data area’s start.

5.6.1 Storage Classes and Data Areas

The compiler can classify values that need storage by their lifetimes. Most
programming languages let programmers create values in at least the fol-
lowing storage classes: automatic, static, and irregular. The compiler maps
a specific variable name into a storage area based on its lifetime, storage
class, and visibility (see Section 4.7.3).

Automatic Variables

An automatic variable a has a lifetime that is identical to the lifetime of its
declaring scope. Therefore, it can be stored in the scope’s local data area. For
example, if a is declared in procedure p, the compiler can store a in p’s local
data area. (If the scope is contained in p, the compiler can set aside space for
the scope inside p’s local data area.) If a is local, scalar, and unambiguous,
the compiler may choose to store it in a register (see Section 4.7.2).

To manage the execution of procedure p, the compiler must ensure that each

Activation record
a region of memory set aside to hold con-
trol information and the local data area for
an invocation of a procedure

We treat “activation” and “invocation” as
synonyms.
invocation of p has a small block of storage to hold the control information
needed by the call and return process. This activation record (AR) will also
contain the arguments passed to p as parameters. ARs are, in principle and
in practice, created when control enters a procedure and freed when control
exits that procedure.



The compiler can place p’s local data area inside its AR. Each call to p will
Activation record pointer
At runtime, the code will maintain a pointer
to the current AR. The activation record
pointer (ARP) almost always resides in a
register for quick access.

create a new AR and, with it, a new local data area. This arrangement en-
sures that the local data area’s lifetime matches the invocation’s lifetime. It
handles recursive calls correctly; it creates a new local data area for each
call. Placing the local data area in the AR provides efficient access to local
variables through the activation record pointer (ARP). In most implemen-
tations, the local data area occupies one end of the procedure’s AR (see
Section 6.3.1).

Static Variables

A static variable s has a lifetime that runs from the first time the executing
program defines s through the last time that the execution uses s’s value. The
first definition and last use of s could cover a short period in the execution;
they could also span the entire execution. The attribute static is typically
implemented to run from the start of execution to its end.

Programming languages support static variables with a variety of visibility
constraints. A global variable is static; it has visibility that spans multi-
ple, nonnested procedures. A static variable declared inside a procedure has
procedure-wide visibility (including nested scopes); the variable retains its
value across multiple invocations of the procedure, much like a global vari-
able. C uses static to create a file-level visibility; the value is live for the
entire execution but only visible to procedures defined inside the same file.

Compilers create distinct data areas for static variables. In principle, a pro-
gram could implement individual data areas for each static variable; alterna-
tively, it could lump them all together into a single area. The compiler writer
must develop a rationale that determines how static variables map into in-
dividual data areas. A simple approach is to create a single static data area
per file of code and rely on the compiler’s name resolution mechanism to
enforce visibility constraints.

Compilers typically use assembly language constructs to create and ini-
tialize static data areas, so allocation, initialization, and deallocation have,
essentially, no runtime cost. The compiler must create global data areas in
a way that allows the system’s linker to map all references to a given global
name to the same storage location—the meaning of “global” visibility.

Irregular Entities

Some values have lifetimes that are under program control, in the sense that
If a heap-allocated value has exactly one
allocation, either the programmer or the
compiler can convert it to a static lifetime.
the code explicitly allocates space for them. (Deallocation may be implicit
or explicit.) The key distinction is that allocation and deallocation occur at



times unrelated to any particular procedure’s lifetime and have the potential
to occur multiple times in a single execution.

The compiler’s runtime support library must provide a mechanism to al-
Heap
a region of memory set aside for irregu-
lar entities and managed by the runtime
support library

locate and free these irregular entities. Systems commonly use a runtime
heap for such purposes. Control of the heap may be explicit, through calls
such as LINUX’s malloc and free. Alternatively, the heap may be managed
with implicit deallocation through techniques such as garbage collection or
reference counting.

While storage for the actual entities may be on the heap, the source code
typically requires a name to begin a reference or chain of references. Thus,
a linked list might consist of an automatic local variable, such as root, that
contains a pointer to the first element of the list. root would need space in
a register or the local data area, while the individual list elements might be
allocated on the heap.

Temporary Values

During execution, a program computes many values that are never stored
Optimization can extend a temporary
value’s lifetime. If the code recomputes
b × c, the compiler might preserve its
value rather than compute it twice (see
Section 8.4.1).

into named locations. For example, when compiled code evaluates a - b × c,
it computes the value of b × c but has no semantic reason to retain its value.
Because these temporary values have no names, they cannot be reused by
the programmer. They have brief lifetimes.

When a temporary value has a representation that can fit in a register, the
compiler should try to keep that value in a register. Some temporary values
cannot fit in a register. Others have unknown lengths. For example, if d and
e are strings of unknown length and + is concatenation, then one scheme to
evaluate length(d + e) creates the string temporary d + e, also of unknown
length.

The compiler can place large values of known or bounded length at the end
of the local data area. If the length cannot be bounded, the compiler may
need to generate code that performs a runtime allocation to create space for
the value on the heap.

5.6.2 Layout Within a Virtual Address Space

The compiler must plan how the code will use memory at runtime. In most
Virtual address space
In many systems, each process has an ad-
dress space that is isolated from those of
other processes. These address spaces are
virtual, in the sense that they are not tied
directly to physical memory (see Fig. 5.15).

systems, each program runs in a distinct virtual address space; the program
executes in its own protected range of addresses. The operating system and
the underlying hardware map that virtual address space onto the actual phys-
ical hardware in a transparent fashion; the compiler only concerns itself with
virtual addresses.



■ FIGURE 5.14 Virtual Address-Space Layout.

The layout of the virtual address space is determined by an agreement
among the operating system, hardware, and compiler. While minor details
differ across implementations, most systems resemble the layout shown
Fig. 5.14. The address space divides into four categories of storage:

Code
At one end of the address space, the compiler places executable
code. Compiled code has, in general, known size. It rarely changes at
runtime. If it changes size at runtime, the new code generally lives in a
heap-allocated block of storage.

Static
The second category of storage holds statically defined entities.
This category includes global and static variables. The size of the static
area can be determined at link time, when all of the code and data is com-
bined to form an executable image.

Heap
The heap is a variable-sized region of memory allocated under ex-
In some circumstances, activation records
must be heap allocated (see Section 6.3.1).
plicit program control. Dynamically allocated entities, such as variable-
sized data structures or objects (in an OOL), are typically placed in the
heap. Deallocation can be implicit, with garbage collection or reference
counting, or explicit, with a runtime support routine that frees a heap-
allocated object.

Stack
Most of the time, procedure invocations obey a last-in, first-out dis-
cipline. That is, the code calls a procedure and that procedure returns. In
this environment, activation records can be allocated on a stack, which
allows easy allocation, deallocation, and reuse of memory. The stack is
placed opposite the heap, with all remaining free space between them.

The heap and the stack grow toward each other. This arrangement allows
for efficient use of the free space between them.

From the compiler’s perspective, this virtual address space is the whole
picture. However, modern computer systems typically execute many pro-
grams in an interleaved fashion. The operating system maps multiple virtual
address spaces into the single physical address space supported by the pro-
cessor. Fig. 5.15 shows this larger picture. Each program is isolated in its
own virtual address space; each can behave as if it has its own machine.



■ FIGURE 5.15 Different Views of the Address Space.

A single virtual address space can occupy disjoint pages in the physical
Page
the fundamental unit of allocation in a
virtual address space

The operating system maps virtual pages
into physical page frames.

address space; thus, the addresses 100,000 and 200,000 in the program’s vir-
tual address space need not be 100,000 bytes apart in physical memory. In
fact, the physical address associated with the virtual address 100,000 may be
larger than the physical address associated with the virtual address 200,000.
The mapping from virtual addresses to physical addresses is maintained co-
operatively by the hardware and the operating system. It is, in almost all
respects, beyond the compiler’s purview.

5.6.3 Storage Assignment

Given the set of variables in a specific data area, the compiler must assign
them each a storage location. If the compiler writer intends to maximize
register use, then the compiler will first find each register-sized unambigu-
ous value and assign it a unique virtual register (see Section 4.7.2). Next, it
will assign each ambiguous value an offset from the start of the data area.
Section 5.6.5 describes a method for laying out data areas while minimizing
the impact of hardware alignment restrictions.

Internal Layout for Arrays

Most programming languages include an array construct—a dimensioned
While arrays were added to FORTRAN to
model matrices in numerical calculations,
they have many other uses.
aggregate structure in which all the members have the same type. During
storage layout, the compiler needs to know where it will place each array. It
must also understand when the size of that array is set and how to calculate
its space requirements. These issues depend, in part, on the scheme used to
lay out the array elements in memory.



■ FIGURE 5.16 Two-Dimensional Array Layouts.

The compiler can lay out a one-dimensional array, or vector, as a set of
adjacent memory locations. Given the range of valid indices, from low to
high, the vector will need (high - low + 1) × w contiguous bytes of storage,
where w is the width of an element in bytes. The address of V[i] is just
@V + (i - low) × w where @V is the address of the first element of V.

With two or more dimensions, the language must specify an array layout.
Section 7.3.2 discusses the address calcula-
tions for each of these layouts.
Fig. 5.16 shows three options that are used in practice. Panel (a) shows a
conceptual view of a 3 × 4 array.

An array in row-major order is laid out as a series of rows, as shown in
panel (b). Many languages use row-major order. Alternatively, an array that
is in column-major order is laid out as a series of columns, as shown in
panel (d). FORTRAN uses column-major order. If the array has c columns
and r rows with elements of w bytes, both of these layouts use c × r × w bytes
of contiguous storage.

The final option is to lay out the array as a series of indirection vectors,
as shown in panel (c). JAVA uses this scheme. Here, the final dimension
of the array is laid out in contiguous locations, and the other dimensions
are represented with vectors of pointers. For an array with c columns and r
rows, it requires c × r × w space for the data, plus r × p space for the pointers,
where w is the size of an array element and p is the size of a pointer. The
individual rows and the column of pointers need not be contiguous.

Internal Layout for Strings

Most programming languages support some form of string. Character
Section 7.6 discusses operations on strings.
strings are common; strings with elements of other types do occur. The rep-
resentation is slightly more complex than that of a vector because a string



variable might take on string values of different lengths at runtime. Thus, a
string representation must hold the string’s current content and the length of
that content. It might also indicate the longest string that it can hold.

Two common representations are a null-terminated string and a string with
The glyph b/ represents a blank.
a length field. A null-terminated string, shown to the left, uses a vector of
elements, with a designated end-of-string marker. C introduced this repre-
sentation; other languages have followed.

The explicit length representation, shown on the right, stores the value of
the length in a separate field. These two layouts have slightly different space
requirements; the null-terminated string requires an extra element to mark
the string’s end while the explicit length representation needs an integer
large enough to hold the maximum string length.

The real difference between these representations lies in the cost of comput-
ing the string’s length. In the null-terminated string, the cost is O(n) where n
is the string’s length, while the same operation is O(1) in the explicit-length
string. This difference carries into other operations that need to know the
length, such as concatenation. It plays a critical role in range checking (see
Section 7.3.3).

Internal Layout for Structures

The compiler must also perform layout for structures and objects. Most
languages treat the interior of a structure declaration as a new scope. The
programmer can use arbitrary names for the fields and scope rules will en-
sure the correct interpretation. Each field in a structure declaration allocates
space within the structure; the compiler must assign each field an offset
within the structure’s representation.

Programming languages differ as to whether or not the text of a structure
Systems programming languages often fol-
low declaration layout so that a program
can interface with hardware defined lay-
outs, such as device control blocks.

declaration also defines the layout of the structure. Strong arguments exist
for either choice. If the declaration dictates layout, then the compiler assigns
offsets to the fields as declared. If the compiler controls structure layout, it
can assign offsets within the structure to eliminate wasted space, using the
technique for data-area layout.



■ FIGURE 5.17 Multiple Instances of Class ColorPoint.

Internal Layout for Object Records

In an object-oriented language, each object has its own object record (OR).
Because object lifetimes are irregular, ORs typically live on the heap. The

OR holds the data members specified by the object’s class, along with point-
ers to its class and, in many implementations, a vector of the class’ methods.
With inheritance, the OR must include data members inherited from its su-
perclasses and access to code members of its superclasses.

The drawing in the margin shows an OR layout for an instance of class

ColorPoint from Fig. 5.11. The OR has storage for each data member of
the object, plus pointers to class ColorPoint’s OR and to a vector of visible
methods for ColorPoint.

The major complication in object layout arises from the fact that superclass
methods should work on subclass objects. To ensure this interoperability, the
subclass object layout must assign consistent offsets to data members from
superclasses. With single-inheritance, the strategy of prefix layout achieves
this goal. The subclass object layout uses the superclass object layout as a
prefix. Data members from ancestors in the superclass chain retain consis-
tent offsets; data members from the current class are added to the end of the

OR layout.

To reduce storage requirements, most implementations store the method
We use the terms method vector and code
vector interchangeably.
vector in the class’ OR rather than keeping a copy in each object’s OR.
Fig. 5.17 shows the ORs for two instances of ColorPoint along with the
class’ OR. Linking the ORs for CPOne and CPTwo directly to the method vec-
tor for ColorPoint reduces the space requirement without any direct cost.
Of course, offsets in the method vectors must be consistent up the inheri-
tance hierarchy chain; again, prefix layout works well for single inheritance
environments.



DETAILS MATTER
In compiler construction, the details matter. As an example, consider two
classes, α and its subclass β. When the compiler lays out β’s object records,
does it include private members of α? Since they are private, an object of
class β cannot access them directly.

An object of class β will need those private members from α if α provides
public methods that read or write those private members. Similarly, if the OR
layout changes without them, the private members may be necessary to
ensure that public members have the correct offsets in an OR of class β
(even if there is no mechanism to read their values).

To simplify lookup, the OR can contain a fully instantiated code vector, with
pointers to both class and superclass methods.

Object Record Layout for Multiple Inheritance

Multiple inheritance complicates OR layout. The compiled code for a su-
perclass method uses offsets based on the OR layout of that superclass.
Different immediate superclasses may assign conflicting offsets to their
members. To reconcile these competing offsets, the compiler must adopt
a slightly more complex scheme: it must use different OR pointers with
methods from different superclasses.

Consider a class α that inherits from multiple superclasses, β, γ , and δ. To
lay out the OR for an object of class α, the implementation must first impose
an order on α’s superclasses—say β, γ , δ. It then lays out the OR for class
α with the entire OR for β, including class pointer and method vector, as a
prefix to α. Following that, it lays out the OR for γ and, then, the OR for
δ. To this layout, it appends the data members of α. It constructs a method
vector by appending the inherited methods, in order by class, followed by
any methods from α. The drawing in the margin shows this layout, with the
class pointers and method vectors for β and γ in the middle of the OR.

The drawing assumes that each class defines two data members: β defines a
and b; γ defines c and d; δ defines e and f; and α defines g and h. The code
vector for α points to a vector that contains all of the methods that α defines
or inherits.

At runtime, a method from class β will find all of the data members that it
expects at the same offsets as in an object of class β. Similarly, a method
compiled for class α will find the data members of α at offsets known when
the method was compiled.



For members of classes γ or δ, however, data members are at the wrong
Methods compiled for β, γ , or δ cannot see
members defined in α. Thus, the code can
adjust the OR pointer with impunity.
offset. The compiler needs to adjust the OR pointer so that it points to the
appropriate point in the OR. Many systems accomplish this effect with a
trampoline function. The trampoline function simply increments the OR
pointer and then invokes the method; on return from the method, it decre-
ments the OR pointer and returns.

5.6.4 Fitting Storage Assignment into Translation

The compiler writer faces a choice in translation. She can design the com-
piler to perform as much translation as possible during the syntax-driven
phase, or she can design it to build an initial IR during the translation and
rely on subsequent passes over the IR to complete the translation. The tim-
ing of storage layout plays directly into this choice.

1. Some languages require that all variables be declared before any exe-

The compiler writer can use a mid-
production action in a rule similar to

Body → Decls Execs

where Decls derives declarations and Execs
derives executable statements.
cutable statement appears. The compiler can gather all of the type and
symbol information while processing declarations. Before it processes
the first executable statement, it can perform storage layout, which al-
lows it to generate concrete code for references.
2. If the language requires declarations, but does not specify an order, the
compiler can build up the symbol table during parsing and emit IR with
abstract references. After parsing, it can perform type inference followed
by storage layout. It can then refine the IR and make the references more
concrete.
3. If the language does not require declarations, the compiler must build
an IR with abstract references. The compiler can then perform some
more complex (probably iterative) type inference on the IR, followed by
storage layout. Finally, it can refine the IR and make the references more
concrete.

The choice between these approaches depends on the rules of the source
language and the compiler writer’s preference. A multipass approach may
simplify the code in the compiler itself.

5.6.5 Alignment Restrictions and Padding

Instruction set architectures restrict the alignment of values. (Assume, for
Alignment restriction
Most processors restrict the alignment
of values by their types. For example, an
eight-byte integer may need to begin at an
address a such that a mod 8 = 0.

this discussion, that a byte contains eight bits and that a word contains four
bytes.) For each hardware-supported data type, the ISA may restrict the set
of addresses where a value of that type may be stored. For example, a 32-
bit floating-point number might be restricted to begin on a word, or 32-bit,
boundary. Similarly, a 64-bit integer might be restricted to a doubleword, or
64-bit boundary.



Name
Bytes
Constraint

a
1
@a mod 1 = 0

b
4
@b mod 4 = 0

c
1
@c mod 1 = 0

d
4
@d mod 4 = 0

(a) Variables and Their Alignments

a
padding
b
c
padding
d

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

(b) A Layout That Wastes Space

b
d
a
c
available

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

(c) A Better Layout

■ FIGURE 5.18 Alignment Issues in Data-Area Offset Assignment.

The compiler has two mechanisms to enforce alignment restrictions. First,
it can control the alignment of the start of each data area. Most assembly
languages have directives to enforce doubleword or quadword alignment at
the start of a data area. Such pseudooperations ensure that each data area
starts at a known alignment.

Second, the compiler controls the internal layout of the data area; that is, it
assigns an offset to each value stored in the data area. It can ensure, through
layout, that each value has the appropriate alignment. For example, a value
that needs doubleword alignment must have an offset that is evenly divisible
by eight.

Consider a variable x stored at offset in a data area that starts at address base.
If base is quadword aligned, then base MOD 16 = 0. If offset MOD 8 = 0,
then the address of x, which is base + offset, is doubleword aligned—that is
(base + offset) MOD 8 = 0.

As the compiler lays out a data area, it must satisfy all of the alignment
restrictions. To obtain proper alignment, it may need to insert empty space
between values. Fig. 5.18(a) shows the lengths and constraints for a simple
four-variable example. Panel (b) shows the layout that results if the compiler
assigns them offsets in alphabetical order. It uses sixteen bytes and wastes
six bytes in padding. Panel (c) shows an alternative layout that uses ten bytes
with no padding. In both cases, some space may be wasted before the next
entity in memory.

To create the layout in panel (c), the compiler can build a list of names for
a given data area and sort them by their alignment restrictions, from largest
to smallest alignment boundary. Next, it can assign offsets to the names in
sorted order. If it must insert padding to reach the alignment boundary for
the next name, it may be able to fill that space with small-boundary names
from the end of the list.



SECTION REVIEW
The compiler must decide, for each runtime entity, where in storage it will
live and when its storage will be allocated. The compiler bases its decision
on the entity’s lifetime and its visibility. It classifies names into storage
classes. For objects with predictable lifetimes, the storage class guides these
decisions.

The compiler typically places items with unpredictable lifetimes on the
runtime heap. Heap-based entities are explicitly allocated; typically,
references to heap-based entities involve a level of indirection through a
variable with a regular lifetime.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In C, a file might contain both file static and procedure static variables.
Does the compiler need to create separate data areas for these two dis-
tinct classes of visibility?

2.
Consider the short fragment of C code shown in the margin. It names
three values, a, b, and *b. Which of these values are ambiguous? Which
are unambiguous?

5.7 ADVANCED TOPICS

This chapter has focused on the mechanism of syntax-driven translation and
its uses in building a compiler. As use cases, it has discussed translation of
expressions and if–then–else statements, models of the source program’s
naming environment, a simple approach to type checking, and storage lay-
out. This section expands on three issues.

The first subsection looks at the relationship between the direction of recur-
sion in a grammar and associativity. The second subsection discusses the
interaction between language design and type inference and checking. The
final subsection looks briefly at the interaction between cache offsets and
performance.

5.7.1 Grammar Structure and Associativity

In Chapter 3, we saw left-recursive and right-recursive variants of the ex-
pression grammar, along with a transformation to eliminate left-recursion.
In that discussion, we noted that the transformation preserves associativity.
This subsection explores the relationship between recursion, associativity,



IR structure, and parse stack depth. Consider the following simple gram-
mars, for addition over names.

Expr
→
Expr + name
Expr
→
name + Expr
|
name
|
name

Left-Recursive Grammar
Right-Recursive Grammar

Given an input expression a + b + c + d + e, the two grammars lead to signifi-
cantly different ASTs, as shown in the margin. With extreme values, these
trees can evaluate to measurably different results.

A postorder evaluation of the AST from the left-recursive grammar will
evaluate to (((a + b) + c) + d) + e, while the right-recursive version will eval-
uate to (((d + e) + c) + b) + a. With addition, which is both commutative and
associative, the numerical difference in these sums will only arise with ex-
tremely large or small values.

With an LL(1) parser generator, where left recursion is not an option, the
compiler writer can obtain left-associativity by writing the left-recursive
grammar and using the transformation to convert left-recursion to right-
recursion. With an LR(1) parser generator, the compiler writer can choose
either left or right recursion to suit the circumstances.

Stack Depth

In general, left recursion can lead to smaller stack depths. Consider what
happens when an LR(1) parser processes the expression a + b + c + d + e with
each of our grammars shown earlier.

1. Left-Recursive Grammar This grammar shifts a onto the stack and im-
mediately reduces it to Expr. Next, it shifts + and b onto the stack and
reduces Expr + b to Expr. It continues, shifting a + and a name onto the
stack and reducing the left context to Expr. When it hits the end of the
string, the maximum stack depth has been three and the average depth
has been 1.8.
2. Right-Recursive Grammar This grammar first shifts all the tokens onto
the stack (a, +, b, +, c, +, d, +, e). It then reduces e to Expr, using the second
rule. It then performs a series of four reduces with the first production:

d + Expr to Expr, c + Expr to Expr, b + Expr to Expr, and a + Expr to Expr. When
it finishes, the maximum stack depth has been nine and the average stack
depth has been 4.8.

The right-recursive grammar requires more stack space; its maximum stack
depth is bounded only by the length of the expression. By contrast, the



maximum stack depth with the left-recursive grammar depends on the gram-
mar rather than the input stream.

Building Lists

The same issues arise with lists of elements, such as the list of statements in
a block. The compiler writer can use either left recursion or right recursion
in the grammar.

List
→
List ; stmt
List
→
stmt ; List
|
stmt
|
stmt

Left-Recursive Grammar
Right-Recursive Grammar

The left-recursive grammar uses a bounded amount of stack space while
the right-recursive grammar uses stack space proportional to the length of
the list. For short lists, stack space is not a problem. For long lists—say
a block with hundreds or thousands of statements—the difference can be
dramatic. This observation suggests that the compiler writer should use the
left-recursive grammar.

The problem with this approach arises when the compiler builds a data struc-
ture to represent the list. Consider a simple abstract syntax tree for a four
element list: (a b c d). The AST from the right-recursive grammar reflects
our intuitions about the statement list; a is first and d is last. The tree from
the left-recursive grammar represents the same information; the statements
are ordered correctly left to right. The nesting order, however, is somehow
less intuitive than that for the right-recursive version of the AST. The code
to traverse the list becomes less obvious, as well.

In many cases, the compiler writer will want to use the left-recursive gram-
mar for its bounded stack space but build the AST that would naturally result
from the right-recursive grammar. The answer is to build a list constructor
that adds successive elements to the end of the list. A straightforward imple-
mentation of this idea would walk the list on each reduction, which makes
the constructor take O(n2) time, where n is the length of the list.

With the right set of list constructors, the compiler writer can arrange to
build the right-recursive AST from the left-recursive grammar. Consider the
following syntax-driven framework:

List
→
List′
{ $$ ← RemoveListHeader() ; }

List′
→
List′ ; stmt
{ AddToEnd($1, $2) ; }
|
stmt
{ AddToEnd( MakeListHeader(), $1) ; }



The framework uses three helper functions.
We developed this framework for an ILOC
parser written in bison. The original right-
recursive version overflowed the parse stack
on inputs with more than 64,000 operations.
MakeListHeader()
builds a header node that contains pointers to the start
and end of a list. It returns a pointer to the header node.

RemoveListHeader(x)
takes as input a header node x. It returns x’s start-
of-list pointer and discards the header node.

AddToEnd(x,y)
takes as input a header node x and an item y. It creates a
new List node and makes y its left child and nil its right child. It then
uses x’s end-of-list pointer to add the new List node to the end of the list.
Finally, it returns x.

Each of these functions can be implemented so that it uses O(1) time. They
work together to build and maintain both the header node and the list. The
framework adds the production List → List′ to create a point in the compu-
tation where it can discard the header node. The AST that it builds differs
slightly from the one shown earlier; as shown in the margin, it always has a
nil as the right child of the final List node.

5.7.2 Harder Problems in Type Inference

Strongly typed, statically checked languages can help the programmer pro-
duce valid programs by detecting large classes of erroneous programs. The
same features that expose errors can improve the compiler’s ability to gen-
erate efficient code for a program by (1) eliminating runtime checks or
(2) exposing situations where the compiler can specialize code for some
construct to eliminate cases that cannot occur at runtime. These advantages
account, in part, for the growing role of type systems in programming lan-
guages.

Our examples, however, make assumptions that do not hold in all program-
ming languages. For example, we assumed that variables and procedures are
declared—the programmer writes down a concise and binding specification
for each name. Varying these assumptions can radically change the nature
of both the type-checking problem and the strategies that the compiler can
use to implement the language.

Some programming languages either omit declarations or treat them as op-
tional information. PYTHON and SCHEME programs lack declarations for
variables. SMALLTALK programs declare classes, but an object’s class is
determined only when the program instantiates that object. Languages that
support separate compilation—compiling procedures independently and
combining them at link time to form a program—may not require decla-
rations for independently compiled procedures.



In the absence of declarations, type checking is harder because the compiler
must rely on contextual clues to determine the appropriate type for each
name. For example, if the compiler sees an array reference a[i], that us-
age might constrain the type of i. The language might allow only integer
subscripts; alternatively, it might allow any type that can be converted to an
integer.

Typing rules are specified by the language definition. The specific details
of those rules determine how difficult it is to infer a type for each variable.
This, in turn, has a direct effect on the strategies that a compiler can use to
implement the language.

Type-Consistent Uses and Constant Function Types

Consider a declaration-free language that requires consistent uses for vari-
ables and functions. The compiler can assign a general type to each name
and narrow that type by examining uses of the name in context. For exam-
ple, the statement a ← b × 3.14159 suggests that a and b are numbers and that
a must have a type that allows it to hold a decimal number. If b also appears
in contexts where an integer is expected, such as an array reference c[b],
then the compiler must choose between a decimal number (for b × 3.14159)
and an integer (for c[b]). With either choice, one of the uses will need a
conversion.

If functions have return types that are both known and constant—that is,
a function fee always returns the same type—then the compiler can solve
the type inference problem with an iterative fixed-point algorithm operating
over a lattice of types.

Type-Consistent Uses and Unknown Function Types

If the type of a function varies with the function’s arguments, then the
problem of type inference becomes more complex. This situation arises in
SCHEME, for example, where the library function map takes as arguments a
Map can also handle functions with multi-
ple arguments. To do so, it takes multiple
argument lists and treats them as lists of
arguments, in order.
function and a list. It returns the result of applying the function argument to
each element of the list. That is, if the argument function takes type α to β,
then map takes a list of α to a list of β. We would write its type signature as

map: (α→β) × list of α → list of β

Since map’s return type depends on the types of its arguments, a property
known as parametric polymorphism, the inference rules must include equa-
tions over the space of types. (With known, constant return types, functions
return values in the space of types.) With this addition, a simple iterative
fixed-point approach to type inference is not sufficient.



The classic approach to checking these more complex systems relies on
unification, although clever type-system design and type representations can
enable use of simpler or more efficient techniques.

Dynamic Changes in Type

If a variable’s type can change during execution, other strategies may be re-
quired to discover where type changes occur and to infer appropriate types.
In principle, a compiler can rename the variables so that each definition site
corresponds to a unique name. It can then infer types for those names based
on the context provided by the operation that defines each name.

To infer types successfully, such a system would need to handle points in
the code where distinct definitions must merge due to the convergence of
different control-flow paths, as with φ-functions in static single assignment
form (see Sections 4.6.2 and 9.3). If the language includes parametric poly-
morphism, the type-inference mechanism must handle it, as well.

The classic approach to implementing a language with dynamically chang-
ing types is to fall back on interpretation. LISP, SCHEME, SMALLTALK,
and APL all face this challenge. The standard implementation practice for
these languages involves interpreting the operators, tagging the data with
their types, and checking for type errors at runtime.

In APL, the expression a × b can multiply integers the first time it executes
and multiply multidimensional arrays of floating-point numbers the next
time. This feature led to a body of research on check elimination and check
motion. The best APL systems avoided many of the checks that a naive
interpreter would need.

5.7.3 Relative Offsets and Cache Performance

The widespread use of cache memories has subtle implications for the lay-
out of variables in memory. If two values are used in proximity in the code,
the compiler would like to ensure that they can reside in the cache at the
same time. This can be accomplished in two ways. In the best situation, the
two values would share a single cache block, to guarantee that the values are
always fetched into cache together. If they cannot share a cache block, the
compiler would like to ensure that the two variables map to different cache
lines. The compiler can achieve this by controlling the distance between
their addresses.

If we consider just two variables, controlling the distance between them
seems manageable. When all the active variables are considered, however,
the problem of optimal arrangement for a cache is NP-complete. Most



A PRIMER ON CACHE MEMORIES
One technique that architects use to bridge the gap between processor
speed and memory speed is the use of cache memories. A cache is a small,
fast memory placed between the processor and main memory. The cache is
divided into a set of equal-sized frames. Each frame has a tag that holds
enough of the main-memory address to identify the contents of the frame.

The hardware automatically maps memory locations to cache frames. The
simplest mapping, used in a direct-mapped cache, computes the cache
address as the main memory address modulo the size of the cache. This
partitions the memory into a linear set of blocks, each the size of a cache
frame. A line is a memory block that maps to a frame. At any point in time,
each cache frame holds a copy of the data from one of its blocks. Its tag field
holds the address in memory where that data normally resides.

On each read from memory, the hardware first checks to see if the requested
word is already in its cache frame. If so, it returns the requested bytes to the
processor. If not, (1) the block currently in the frame is evicted, (2) the
requested block is fetched into the cache, and (3) the requested bytes are
returned to the processor.

Some caches use more complex mappings. A set-associative cache uses
multiple frames per cache line, typically two or four frames per line. A fully
associative cache can place any block in any frame. Both of these schemes
use an associative search over the tags to determine if a block is in the cache.
Associative schemes use a policy to determine which block to evict.
Common schemes are random replacement and least-recently-used
replacement.

In practice, the effective memory speed is determined by memory
bandwidth, cache block length, the ratio of cache speed to memory speed,
and the ratio of cache hits to cache misses. From the compiler’s perspective,
the first three are fixed. Compiler-based efforts to improve memory
performance focus on increasing the ratio of cache hits to cache misses.

Some architectures provide instructions for a program to give the cache
hints as to when specific blocks should be brought into memory (prefetched)
and when they can be discarded (flushed).

variables have interactions with many other variables; this creates a web
of relationships that the compiler may not be able to satisfy concurrently. If
we consider a loop that uses several large arrays, the problem of arranging
mutual noninterference becomes even worse. If the compiler can discover
the relationship between the various array references in the loop, it can add
padding between the arrays to increase the likelihood that the references hit
different cache lines and, thus, do not interfere with each other.



As we saw previously, the mapping of the program’s virtual address space
to the hardware’s physical address space need not preserve the distance be-
tween specific variables. Carrying this thought to its logical conclusion, the
reader should ask how the compiler can ensure anything about relative off-
sets that are larger than the size of a virtual-memory page. The processor’s
cache may use either virtual addresses or physical addresses in its tag fields.
A virtually addressed cache preserves the distance between values in the vir-
tual space; the compiler may force noninterference between large objects.
With a physically addressed cache, the distance between two locations in
different pages is determined by the page map (unless cache size ≤ page
size). Thus, the compiler’s decisions about memory layout have little, if any,
effect, except within a single page. In this situation, the compiler should fo-
cus on placing objects that are referenced together into the same page and,
if possible, the same cache line.

5.8 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

The real work of compilation is translation: mapping constructs in the
source language to operations on the target machine. The compiler’s front
end builds an initial model of the program: an IR representation and a set
of ancillary structures. This chapter explored syntax-driven translation, a
mechanism that lets the compiler writer specify actions to be performed
when the front end recognizes specific syntactic constructs. The compiler
writer ties those actions to grammar productions; the compiler executes
them when it recognizes the production.

Formal techniques have automated much of scanner and parser construction.
In translation, most compilers rely on the ad-hoc techniques of syntax-
driven translation. While researchers have developed more formal tech-
niques, such as attribute grammar systems, those systems have not been
We suspect that attribute grammar systems
have failed to win an audience because
of the lack of a widely available, well-
implemented, easy-to-use system.

yacc and bison won the day not because
they are elegant, but because they were
distributed with UNIX and they worked.

widely adopted. The syntax-driven techniques are largely ad-hoc; it takes
some practice for a compiler writer to use them effectively. This chapter
captures some of that experience.

To perform translation, the compiler must build up a base of knowledge that
is deeper than the syntax. It must use the language’s type system to infer
a type for each value that the program computes and use that information
to drive both error detection and automatic type conversions. Finally, the
compiler must compute a storage layout for the code that it sees; that stor-
age layout must be consistent with and compatible with the results of other
compilations of related code.



CHAPTER NOTES

The material in this chapter is an amalgam of accumulated knowledge drawn
from practices that began in the late 1950s and early 1960s.

The concepts behind syntax-driven translation have always been a part of the
development of real parsers. Irons, describing an early ALGOL-60 compiler,
clearly lays out the need to separate a parser’s actions from the description of
its syntax [214]; he describes the basic ideas behind syntax-driven transla-
tion. The same basic ideas were undoubtedly used in contemporary operator
precedence parsers.

The specific notation used to describe syntax-driven actions was introduced
by Johnson in the yacc system [216]. This notation has been carried forward
into many more recent systems, including the Gnu project’s bison parser
generator.

Type systems have been an integral part of programming languages since
the original FORTRAN compiler. While the first type systems reflected the
resources of the underlying machine, deeper levels of abstraction soon ap-
peared in type systems for languages such as ALGOL 68 and SIMULA-67.
The theory of type systems has been actively studied for decades, produc-
ing a string of languages that embodied important principles. These in-
clude RUSSELL [49] (parametric polymorphism), CLU [256] (abstract data
types), SMALLTALK [172] (subtyping through inheritance), and ML [274]
(thorough and complete treatment of types as first-class objects). Cardelli
has written an excellent overview of type systems [76]. The APL community
produced a series of classic papers that dealt with techniques to eliminate
runtime checks [1,38,273,361].

Most of the material on storage layout has developed as part of program-
ming language specifications. Column-major order for arrays appeared in
early FORTRAN systems [27,28] and was codified in the FORTRAN 66
standard. Row-major order has been used since the 1950s.

EXERCISES

1.
Consider the problem of adding syntax-driven actions to an LL(1) parser
Section 5.3
generator. How would you modify the LL(1) skeleton parser to include
user-defined actions for productions?

2.
Consider the following simple grammar, which describes the language
of strings over the words one, two, and three.


Exercises
271

Goal
→
List

List
→
List
Word

|
Word

Word
→
one

|
two

|
three

Each word has a weight: one = 1, two = 2, and three = 3.

Write a set of syntax-driven translation rules that computes two mea-
sures of the input sentence: the sum of the weights of all the words and
the number of times that each word occurs (its frequency count).

On a reduction to the Goal symbol, the framework should print out both
the sum and the frequency counts.

3.
The “define-before-use” rule requires that each variable used in a pro-
Section 5.4
cedure be declared before it is used in the text. Sketch a simple syntax-
driven translation scheme for checking that a procedure conforms to this
rule. (Hint: Use a map.)

Is this problem any easier if the language requires that all declaration
statements precede any executable statement?

4.
For the program shown in Fig. 5.9, draw the complete set of symbol
tables and show the search paths that the compiler should construct for
each of Main, Fee, Fie, Foe, and Fum.

5.
When the compiler encounters a structure definition, it must treat the
interior of that definition as a new scope. (Names defined as structure
elements obscure identical names in the surrounding scope.)

a.
If the compiler represents these scopes with independent tables,
how might it link them into the search path?

b.
Can the compiler use qualified names (e.g., x.next) to represent
these names?

6.
The compiler must store information in the IR version of the program
that allows it to find the symbol table entry for each name. Among the
options open to the compiler writer are pointers to the original character
strings, pointers to the symbol table entries, and a pair that contains a
pointer to the specific table and an offset within it.

What are the advantages and disadvantages of each of these represen-
tations for a name? How would you choose to represent names in a
compiler that you designed from scratch?



print "enter a number:";
n = input();

if n < 0:
v = "string";
else:
v = 23;

print v;

print "enter a number:";
n = input();

if n < 0:
v = "string";
print v;
else:
v = 23;
print v;

(a) Original PYTHON Program
(b) Modified PYTHON Program

■ FIGURE 5.19 Code for Exercise 7.

7.
Fig. 5.19 shows two versions of a PYTHON program. PYTHON is
Section 5.5
dynamically typed, so the type of v is determined, at runtime, by as-
signments to v. You are developing a tool that tries to perform static
checking for PYTHON programs.

a.
What is the type of v in the print statement in panel (a)?

b.
What is the type of v in each print statement in panel (b)?

c.
Would there be a difference in the type signature that your tool
derived for print for the two versions of the code?

d.
What problems arise if you translate each of these programs to C?

8.
Assume that your compiler uses a framework that combines the work
shown in Figs. 5.5 and 5.13. Augment that framework so that it converts
correctly between integer and floating-point values based on the types
of each subexpression. To provide a concrete IR, use ILOC as described
in Appendix A.

9.
The compiler must assign each variable an offset within its data area.
Section 5.6
Assume that the algorithm receives as input a list of variables, their
lengths, and their alignment restrictions, such as:

⟨a, 4, 4⟩, ⟨b, 3, 1⟩, ⟨c, 8, 8⟩, ⟨d, 4, 4⟩, ⟨e, 1, 4⟩, ⟨f, 8, 16⟩, ⟨g, 1, 1⟩.

The algorithm should produce, as output, a list of the variables and their
offsets in the data area. The algorithm’s goal is to minimize unused, or
wasted, space.

a.
Write down a concise algorithm to perform layout that minimizes
wasted space.

b.
Apply your algorithm to the example list above and to two other
lists that you design to demonstrate the problems that can arise in
storage layout.

c.
What is the complexity of your algorithm?


Exercises
273

10.
Given an array of integers with dimensions A[0:99,0:89,0:109], how
many words of memory are required to represent A in row-major order
and in a set of indirection vectors? Assume that integers and pointers
are the same size.

11.
For each of the following categories of variables, state where in memory
the compiler might allocate space for such a variable. Possible answers
include registers, activation records, static data areas (with different vis-
ibilities), and the runtime heap.

a.
A scalar ambiguous local variable

b.
A scalar unambiguous local variable

c.
A global variable

d.
A dynamically allocated global variable

e.
A formal parameter of the procedure

f.
A compiler-generated temporary value

g.
A local variable with size determined at runtime

12.
For the left-recursive and right-recursive addition grammars given in
Section 5.7
Section 5.7.1, show all of the stack states that occur in parsing the ex-
pression a + b + c + d + e + f. Compute the maximum stack depth and the
average stack depth with each grammar. What is the asymptotic value
for average stack depth with each grammar?


This page intentionally left blank




