Chapter6

Implementing Procedures

ABSTRACT
Procedures play a critical role in the development of software systems. They
provide abstractions for control flow and naming. They provide basic in-
formation hiding. They are the building block on which systems provide
interfaces. They are one of the principal forms of abstraction in Algol-like
languages; object-oriented languages rely on procedures to implement their
methods or code members.

This chapter takes an in-depth look at the implementation of procedures and
procedure calls, from the perspective of a compiler writer. It highlights the
implementation similarities and differences between Algol-like languages
and object-oriented languages. The Advanced Topics section presents a
brief introduction to the algorithms used to manage the runtime heap.

KEYWORDS
Procedure Calls, Parameter Binding, Linkage Conventions

6.1 INTRODUCTION

The procedure is one of the central abstractions in most programming lan-
guages. Procedures create a controlled execution environment; each proce-
dure has its own private storage. Procedures help define interfaces between
system components; cross-component interactions are usually structured
through procedure calls. Finally, procedures are the basic unit of work for
most compilers. A typical compiler processes a collection of procedures
and emits code for them. The code produced by these separate compilations
must link and execute correctly with code compiled at other times.

Procedures play a critial role in separate compilation, which allows software
developers to build large software systems. If the compiler needed the en-
tire text of a program for each compilation, large software systems would
be untenable. Imagine recompiling a multimillion line application for each
editing change made during development! Thus, procedures play as criti-
cal a role in system design and engineering as they do in language design
and compiler implementation. This chapter focuses on how compilers im-
plement procedures and methods.



Conceptual Roadmap

To translate a source-language program into executable code, the compiler
must map all of the source-language constructs that the program uses into
operations and data structures on the target processor. The compiler needs a
strategy for each of the abstractions supported by the source language. These
strategies include both algorithms and data structures that are embedded into
the executable code.

To implement these strategies, the compiler writer must put in place
compile-time computations and data structures, mechanisms to pass infor-
mation from compile time to runtime, and code in the executable to imple-
ment the runtime side of the strategy. All these elements combine to create
the desired behavior when the application program runs.

This chapter explains the techniques that compiler writers use to implement
procedures and procedure calls. Specifically, it examines the implementa-
tion of control, of naming, and of the call interface. These abstractions
encapsulate many of the features that make programming languages usable
and that enable construction of large-scale systems.

A Few Words About Time

This chapter deals with both compile time and runtime issues. The com-
piler plans the desired runtime behavior. It emits code to implement that
behavior—typically, the standard call and return mechanisms. To under-
stand how calls work, the reader should pay careful attention to the interplay
between compile-time planning and runtime behavior.

For example, the compiler must plan for the storage needs of each proce-
Caller
In a procedure call, the procedure that initi-
ates the call is termed the caller.

Callee
In a procedure call, the procedure that is
called is termed the callee.

dure. As it analyzes the procedure’s code, the compiler builds a storage map
that includes the type and size of each value computed in the procedure. It
assigns each value a runtime location. Using the map, the compiler gener-
ates code that will, at runtime, allocate, initialize, and free storage for those
values. The code to implement these decisions is spread across the code for
the caller and the callee.

Similarly, the compiler determines what actions must be taken at each call
site to preserve and protect the environment of the calling procedure; it
then emits code to enact those decisions at runtime. Such decisions include
saving and restoring registers, evaluating and binding parameters, and main-
taining data structures that ensure correct and appropriate access to values
in surrounding scopes. Again, the compiler analyzes, plans, and emits code.
At runtime, that code creates the desired behavior.



Overview

Procedures are the building blocks of programs. They create a known and
controlled execution environment. A procedure executes when it is invoked,
or called, by another procedure. That call creates and initializes procedure-
local storage. It protects the caller’s environment, establishes the callee’s
environment, and creates any linkages between those environments speci-
fied by the call and the language. The callee may return a value to its caller,
in which case the procedure is termed a function. The interface between
procedures lets programmers develop and test parts of a program in isola-
tion; the separation between procedures provides some insulation against
problems in other procedures.

Procedures shape the way that programmers develop software and that com-
pilers translate programs. Three critical abstractions that procedures provide
allow the construction of nontrivial programs.

1. The Call Procedure calls provide an orderly transfer of control between
procedures. The call mechanism provides a standard way to invoke a
procedure and map a set of arguments, or parameters, from the caller’s
name space to the callee’s name space. After the callee completes, con-
trol returns to the caller, at the point immediately after the call. Most
languages allow a procedure to return one or more values to the caller.

Languages and implementations define a standard set of actions required
Linkage convention
an agreement between the compiler and
operating system that defines the actions
taken to call a procedure or function

to invoke a procedure, sometimes referred to as a calling sequence. Stan-
dardization of calling sequences, in the form of a linkage convention, lets
the programmer invoke code written and compiled by other people and
other compilers at other times.
2. Name Space In most languages, a procedure call creates a new and pro-
Actual parameter
A value or variable passed as a parameter at
a call site is an actual parameter of the call.

Formal parameter
A name declared as a parameter of some
procedure p is a formal parameter of p.

tected name space for the callee (see Section 5.4). The programmer can
declare new names, such as variables and labels, inside the procedure
without concern for the surrounding context. Those local declarations
obscure any previously defined items with the same names. The pro-
grammer can use formal parameters in the procedure to map values and
variables from the caller’s name space into the callee’s name space.
Because the procedure has a known and separate name space, it can
function correctly and consistently when called from different contexts.

Executing a call instantiates the callee’s name space. The call must create
storage for the objects declared by the callee. This allocation must be
both automatic and efficient.
3. External Interface Procedures form critical interfaces among the parts
of large software systems. The linkage convention defines rules that
map names to values and locations, that preserve the caller’s runtime



environment and create the callee’s environment, and that transfer con-
trol between caller and callee.

The linkage convention creates a standard way to invoke code written by
other people and in other languages. Uniform calling sequences enable
the construction of large software systems by making possible the use of
libraries and system calls. Without a linkage convention, both the pro-
grammer and the compiler would need to understand the callee’s code at
each procedure call.

Thus, the procedure is, in many ways, the fundamental abstraction that
underlies Algol-like languages (ALLs). It is an elaborate facade created
collaboratively by the compiler, the underlying hardware, and the operat-
ing system. Procedures create named variables and map them to virtual
addresses; the operating system and the hardware map those virtual ad-
dresses to physical addresses. Procedures establish rules for visibility and
addressability of names; the hardware loads and stores values from ad-
dresses computed by the compiled code. Procedures let us decompose large
software systems into components; linkers and loaders knit these compo-
nents together into an executable; the hardware runs that code by simply
advancing its program counter and following branches and jumps.

Implementing the linkage convention requires coordination between the
compiler and the surrounding system, as well as between compilations. The
compiler must arrange for the generated code to use the interfaces provided
by the operating system to handle input and output, to manage memory al-
location and deallocation, and to communicate with other processes. The
compiler must lay out memory for each procedure and encode that knowl-
edge into the generated code. Since the different components of the program
To complicate matters, the user wants the
optimizer to specialize the generated code
to its runtime context so that it runs as
quickly as practical (see Chapters 8–10).

may be compiled at different times, with different compilers, and in iso-
lation from each other, all of these interactions must be standardized and
uniformly applied.

This chapter focuses on the procedure as an abstraction and the mechanisms
that the compiler uses to establish its control abstraction, name space, and
interface to the outside world.

6.2 BACKGROUND

In ALLs, procedures have a simple call/return discipline. A call transfers
control from a call site in the caller to the start of the callee; when the callee
exits, control returns to the point in the caller immediately after the call. If
the callee, in turn, invokes other procedures, they follow the same protocol,
with a call and a return. Fig. 6.1 shows the call graph and execution history
for the PASCAL program from Fig. 5.9.



■ FIGURE 6.1 Nonrecursive PASCAL Program and Its Execution History.

The call graph in panel (b) shows all of the potential calls in the program.
Activation
A call to a procedure activates it; thus, we
call an instance of its execution an activa-
tion.

Executing Main can produce two distinct calls to Fee: one from Foe and the
other from Fum. The execution history shows that both calls actually occur.
Each call creates a distinct instance, or activation, of Fee. By the time that

Fum is called, the first instance of Fee is no longer active. It was created by the
call from Foe (event 3 in the execution history), and destroyed after control
returned to Foe (event 4). When Fum calls Fee (event 6), the call creates a
new activation of Fee. The return from Fee to Fum ends that activation and
makes its state inaccessible.



Fee, Foe, Fie, and Main are active when the program executes the assignment

x := 1 in the first call to Fee. They all lie on a path in the call graph from Main
to Fee. Similarly, Fee, Fum, Foe, Fie, and Main are active when the program
makes its second call to Fee; they lie on another path from Main to Fee. The
call and return mechanism ensures that, at any point during execution, the
procedure activations instantiate some rooted path through the call graph.

When the compiler generates code for calls and returns, that code must pre-
Diverge
A computation that does not terminate
normally is said to diverge.

Return address
When p calls q, the address in p where
execution should continue after q’s return is
called its return address.

serve enough state information to ensure correct operation on a return. When

Foe calls Fum, the code must record Foe’s state, including the address in Foe
to which Fum should return control—its return address. Unless Fum diverges,
control will return to Foe and continue execution in Foe. The call mechanism
preserves enough state to allow that to happen.

The call and return behavior of ALLs can be modeled with a first-in, first-out
stack. Thus, the runtime implementations of many programming languages
use a stack to hold the state of each active procedure. When Fie calls Foe,
it pushes the new state for Foe onto the stack; Foe executes from that state.
When Foe returns, it pops that state off the stack and exposes the state for

Fie, as it was when the call was made.

The stack mechanism handles recursion. In effect, it unrolls the cyclic path
through the call graph and creates a distinct activation and state for each call
to a procedure. As long as the recursion terminates, this path will be finite
and the stack will correctly capture the program’s behavior.

To make this concrete, consider the following recursive factorial computa-
tion, written in SCHEME:

(define (fact k)
(cond
[(<= k 1) 1]
[else (* (fact (sub1 k)) k)]
))

A call to (fact 5) generates a series of recursive calls: (fact 5) calls

(fact 4) calls (fact 3) calls (fact 2) calls (fact 1). At that point, the

cond statement executes the clause for (<= k 1), ending the recursion. The
recursion unwinds in the reverse order. The call to (fact 1) returns the value
1 to (fact 2). It, in turn, returns the value 2 to (fact 3), which returns 6
to (fact 4). Finally, (fact 4) returns 24 to (fact 5), which multiplies 24
times 5 to return the answer 120. The recursive program exhibits last-in,
first-out behavior, so the stack mechanism correctly tracks all of the return
addresses.



Procedure Calls in Object-Oriented Languages

From the perspective of procedure calls, object-oriented languages (OOLs)
are similar to ALLs. The primary differences between procedure calls in an
OOL and an ALL lie in the mechanism used to name the callee and in the
mechanisms used to locate the callee at runtime.

In an OOL, the call is made relative to an object. The compiler knows the
names of the receiver and the method. From those facts, it must determine
the receiver’s class and resolve the method name to the intended implemen-
tation. If the compiler can resolve that name-to-implementation binding at
compile time, it can emit code that looks much like a standard call in an
ALL. If, however, it cannot resolve that binding until runtime, then the com-
piler must emit code that uses runtime data structures to resolve it.

To support runtime name resolution, the compiler must emit code that builds
runtime data structures to instantiate a model of the inheritance hierarchy.
Fig. 5.17 showed a simple example.

More Complex Interprocedural Control Flow

Following the lambda calculus, some programming languages allow a pro-
Closure
a procedure and the runtime context that
defines its free variables
gram to encapsulate a procedure and its runtime context into an object
called a closure. When the closure is invoked, the procedure executes in
the encapsulated runtime context. A simple stack is inadequate to imple-
ment this functionality. Instead, the control information must be saved in
a more general structure that can represent the procedure and its context.
Similar problems arise if the language allows references to local variables
that outlast a procedure’s activation.

SECTION REVIEW
In Algol-like languages, procedures are invoked with a call and they
terminate in a return. The compiler must arrange for the call to record and
preserve the caller’s state and for the return to find and restore the caller’s
state. Using a stack to hold the state for procedure activations captures the
last-in, first-out behavior of the call/return mechanism.

OOLs and languages that support closure build on this basic infrastructure
to produce more complex control flow. OOLs use data-centric naming
schemes to map names to method implementations. Closures break the
relationship between the lifetime of a scope and the call that creates it;
these schemes require more complex implementations.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Many programming languages include a direct transfer of control, a so-
called goto. Compare and contrast a procedure call and a goto.

2.
Many languages make use of libraries of precompiled code. What facts
does the compiler need about the library code so that it can ensure
correct behavior? How does your favorite language provide it to the
compiler?

6.3 RUNTIME SUPPORT FOR NAMING

To support the name spaces that occur in source-language programs, the
compiler must be able to map a given reference into its runtime virtual ad-
dress. The mechanism has two parts: a compile-time capability to resolve
The overall goal is to resolve a compile-
time name into a runtime virtual address.
the name to a specific runtime entity and a runtime method to locate and
access that entity.

The description of these mechanisms is spread over several chapters in the
text. Section 5.4 describes the compile-time mechanisms used to resolve
a source-language name to a specific runtime entity. Section 5.6 discusses
how the compiler determines where in the computer’s memory each en-
tity that needs storage will reside. This section explores the runtime data-
structures that the compiler must put in place to facilitate addressability and
to store values. Finally, Section 7.3 enumerates how the compiler uses these
mechanisms to emit code that can compute a runtime virtual address.

The runtime support for name resolution and translation occurs, primarily,
in two places. The data structures are created, populated, and dismantled
as part of the implementation of procedure calls. Section 6.3.1 describes
the mechanisms commonly used to support the nested lexical scopes that
occur in Algol-like languages (ALLs). Section 6.3.2 discusses the additional
runtime structures required to support object-oriented languages (OOLs).
The remainder of the implementation occurs when the compiler emits code
for individual references, following the plans laid out in Section 7.3.

6.3.1 Runtime Support for Algol-Like Languages

To implement the twin abstractions of procedure calls and lexically scoped
Activation record
a region of storage set aside to hold control
information and data storage associated
with a single instance of a single procedure

name spaces, the compiler and runtime system must establish a set of run-
time data structures. The key structure involved in both control and naming
is the activation record (AR), a private block of memory associated with a
single procedure activation. Each procedure call gives rise to a new AR.



■ FIGURE 6.2 Typical Activation Records.

■
The compiler must emit code so that the caller stores the return address
for the callee. The return address goes in the callee’s AR.

■
The compiler must map the actual parameters at the call site into the
formal parameters by which they are accessible in the callee. This pa-
rameter information goes into the callee’s AR.

■
The compiler must create storage space for local variables declared in
the callee. For the values whose lifetimes match the procedure’s invoca-
tion, that storage goes into the callee’s AR.

■
The compiler must provide the callee with other information needed to
connect it to the calling context and allow it to interact with other proce-
dures. That data goes into the callee’s AR.

Each call creates a new AR. If multiple instances of a procedure are active,
each has its own AR. Thus, recursion gives rise to multiple ARs, each of
which holds the local state for a different activation of the procedure.

Fig. 6.2 shows how the contents of an AR might be laid out. The activation
Activation record pointer
The compiler ensures that a pointer to the
AR, the activation record pointer, is in a
designated register.

We denote that register rarp.

record pointer (ARP) points to a fixed spot in the AR. The various fields in
the AR are found at positive and negative offsets from the ARP. The ARs
shown in Fig. 6.2 have a number of fields.

■
The parameter area holds actual parameters from the call site, in an order
determined by their order of appearance at the call site.

■
The register save area contains enough space to hold the values from
registers that the procedure must preserve across procedure calls.



■
The return-value slot provides space to communicate data from the
callee back to the caller, if needed.

■
The return-address slot holds the runtime address to which control
should return when the callee terminates.

■
The addressability slot holds information that lets the callee access local
The surrounding lexical scope may be a
procedure other than the caller.
variables in surrounding lexical scopes.

■
The slot at the callee’s ARP preserves the caller’s ARP so that the callee
can restore the caller’s environment when it returns.

■
The local data area holds variables declared in the callee’s local scope
that the callee cannot keep in registers, along with other values that the
compiler needs to store.

For the sake of efficiency, some of the information shown in the ARs of
Fig. 6.2 may be kept in dedicated registers.

Local Storage

The AR for an activation of procedure q holds both local data and control
information for that instance of q. Each time the code calls q, that call gen-
erates a new AR. Accesses to fields in an AR occur through the ARP. Thus,
the ARP acts as a handle to the activation’s context and state. At runtime,
the code accesses the AR frequently enough that most compilers dedicate a
physical register to hold the ARP of the active procedure. In ILOC, we refer
to this dedicated register as rarp.

The ARP points to a designated position in the AR. The central part of the

AR has a static layout; all the fields have known fixed lengths. Thus, the
compiled code can access those items at fixed offsets from the ARP. The two
ends of the AR are reserved for storage areas whose sizes depend on specific
details of the corresponding procedure; one typically holds the parameters
while the other holds the local data.

Reserving Space for Local Data

When the compiler performs storage assignment, it assigns space in the lo-
cal data area to automatic local variables that cannot reside in registers (see
Section 5.6.3). As it assigns space to such variables, it should record the
current lexical level and the value’s offset from the ARP in the symbol ta-
ble. This pair, a lexical level and offset, is the key to accessing the value at
runtime. This pair becomes its static coordinate (see Section 7.3.1).

The input program may contain one or more variables for which the size is
not known at compile time. For example, the code might compute the size
of an array or read its size from external media. In such cases, the compiler



can create space in the local data area for a pointer to either the actual data
or a dope vector for the actual data (see Section 7.3.2).

The compiler can then arrange to allocate the space needed for the data
elsewhere. It might put the data in the heap; if the ARs are on a stack, it
might place the data at the top of the stack. In either scenario, the compiler
can arrange to store a pointer to the storage in the space that it created in the
AR, or in the appropriate slot of the dope vector. The static coordinate then
leads to the slot in the AR; the code for the array access then begins with
that pointer.

Initializing Variables

If the source language lets the programmer specify initial values for vari-
Most assemblers provide a pseudooperation
to allocate and initialize static storage.
ables, the compiler must ensure that the initialization occurs. For a statically
allocated variable, the data can be inserted directly into the appropriate lo-
cations in the static data area.

Variables stored in the AR must be initialized at runtime. Because a pro-
cedure may be invoked multiple times, the compiler must emit operations
to perform the initializations on every invocation. In effect, these initializa-
tions are assignments that execute before the procedure’s first statement, on
each invocation.

Space for Saved Register Values

When p calls q, one of them must save the register values that p needs after
Caller-saves register
If the caller has responsibility to preserve
the value of ri across a call, we say that ri
is a caller-saves register.

Callee-saves register
If the callee has responsibility to preserve
the value of ri across its own execution, we
say that ri is a callee-saves register.

the call. It may be necessary to save all the register values; on the other hand,
a subset may suffice. On return to p, these saved values must be restored.
The lifetime of these saved register values matches the lifetime of the callee.
Thus, the compiler can save them in either the callee’s AR or the caller’s AR.

If the caller saves a register before jumping to the callee, it saves the value
into its own AR. Similarly, if the callee saves a register before it begins to
execute, it saves the value into its own AR. Thus, the AR needs capacity
to store a full set of caller-saves and callee-saves registers. Since the caller
saves before the call and restores after the call, it can reuse the same space
for caller-saves registers at each call.

Allocating Activation Records

When procedure p calls procedure q, the code for the call must allocate and
initialize an AR for q. Because procedure calls are frequent, the compiler
writer should try to keep the cost of this allocation as low as possible. In
general, the compiler writer has three choices for AR allocation: stack allo-
cation, heap allocation, and static allocation.



Stack Allocation of Activation Records

In many cases, the contents of an AR are only of interest during a single ac-
tivation of the procedure. If local variables cannot outlive the procedure that
creates them and procedure activations cannot outlive their callers, then calls
and returns are balanced and follow a last-in, first-out (LIFO) discipline.
A call from p to q eventually returns, and any returns that occur between
the call from p to q and the return from q to p must result from calls made
(either directly or indirectly) by q.

With these restrictions, the ARs also follow the LIFO ordering and allo-
cation can use a simple stack. PASCAL, C, and JAVA are typically imple-
mented with stack-allocated ARs, as shown in the margin.

Stack allocation of ARs has several advantages. Allocation and deallocation
are inexpensive; the code performs arithmetic on the top-of-stack (TOS)
pointer. The code can extend the AR at the top of the stack by testing for
stack overflow and then adjusting the TOS pointer. This scheme lets a pro-
cedure extend its AR to create space for dynamically sized local entities.
The drawing in the margin shows this situation. Here, the compiler has left
a slot in the local data area for a pointer to A, and later extended the AR to
create space for A.

With stack allocation, the task of creating the AR can be split between the
caller and the callee. The caller can create those portions of the AR whose
size it knows—everything from the parameter area to the caller’s ARP. The
callee can then extend its own AR to create space for the local data area.

Heap Allocation of Activation Records

If the programming language allows a procedure activation to outlive its
caller, the stack discipline for allocating ARs breaks down. Similarly, if a
procedure can return an object, such as a closure, that includes, explicitly or
implicitly, references to its local variables, stack allocation is inappropriate
because it will leave behind dangling pointers. In these situations, the com-
piler can allocate ARs on a runtime heap (see Section 6.6). Implementations
of SCHEME and ML typically use heap-allocated ARs.

A good memory allocator can keep the cost of heap allocation low. Most
heap implementations do not allow an object to expand after it is allocated.
This fact complicates AR allocation because it implies that either:

1. The caller must know the size of the callee’s local data area. The com-
piler can compute that size and store it in a global constant pool. At each
call, the caller can retrieve the value and include it in the calculation of
the local data area’s size.



2. The callee needs to allocate the local data area separately. This option,
while simpler, may require a separate register to hold a pointer to the
local data area.

With heap-allocated ARs, variable-size objects can be allocated as separate
objects on the heap. If heap objects need explicit deallocation, then the code
for procedure return must free the AR and its variable-size extensions.

Heap allocated ARs work well for closures. The closure holds a pointer to
the AR for the activation that created it. The chain of caller’s ARP fields will
keep the rest of the state live until the closure is invoked. When the closure
is discarded, any parts of that state that were live only because of the closure
will become dead; an implicit deallocation scheme will recycle them.

Static Allocation of Activation Records

If a procedure q calls no other procedures, then q can never have multi-
Leaf procedure
a procedure that contains no calls
ple active invocations. We call q a leaf procedure since it terminates a path
through a graph of possible procedure calls. The compiler can statically al-
locate ARs for leaf procedures to avoid the runtime costs of AR allocation.
If the calling convention has only caller-saves registers (no callee-saves reg-
isters), then q’s AR needs no register save area.

If the language does not allow closures, the compiler can do better than one
static AR per leaf procedure. At any point during execution, only one leaf
procedure can be active. (To have two such procedures active, the first one
would need to call another procedure, so it would not be a leaf.) Thus, the
compiler can allocate a single static AR for use by all of the leaf procedures.
The static AR must be large enough to accommodate any of the program’s
leaf procedures. The static variables declared in any of the leaf procedures
can be laid out together in that single AR, which avoids the need for separate
static ARs for each leaf procedure.

Coalescing Activation Records

If the compiler discovers a set of procedures that are always invoked in
a fixed sequence, it may be able to combine their ARs. For example, if a
call from p to q always results in calls to r and s, the compiler may find
it profitable to allocate the ARs for q, r, and s at the same time. Combin-
ing ARs can save on the costs of allocation; the benefits will vary directly
with allocation costs. In practice, this optimization is limited by separate
compilation and the use of function-valued parameters. Both limit the com-
piler’s ability to determine the calling relationships that actually occur at
runtime.



6.3.2 Runtime Support for Object-Oriented Languages

Just as Algol-like languages need runtime structures such as ARs to support
their lexical name spaces, so too do object-oriented languages need runtime
structures to support both their lexical hierarchy and their class hierarchy.
Some of those structures are identical to the ones found in an ALL. For
example, the control information for methods, as well as storage for method-
local names, is kept in ARs. Other structures are designed to address specific
needs of the OOL. For example, object lifetimes need not match the lifetime
of any particular method activation, so their persistent state cannot be stored
in some AR. Thus, each object needs its own object record (OR) to hold its
state. The ORs of classes instantiate the inheritance hierarchy; they play a
critical role in translation and execution.

Each OR begins with a member class that indicates the object’s class, fol-
lowed by a member code that points to the class’ method vector, as shown
in the margin. The remaining class-specific members follow code. To locate
an OR, the code keeps an OR pointer (ORP) that refers to a fixed offset in
the OR; the drawings will assume it points to the start of the OR.

The amount of runtime support that an OOL needs depends heavily on fea-
tures of the OOL. To explain the range of possibilities, we will begin with
single inheritance and an open class structure, using the example shown in
Section 5.4.2. From there, we will explore the implications of a closed class
structure for method lookup.

Panels (a) and (b) in Fig. 6.3 repeat the example from Chapter 5. Panel (c)
shows the runtime structures that might result from instantiating both a
Point and a ColorPoint. All of Point, ColorPoint, aPoint and aColorPoint
have their own ORs. The OR for class is off-page.

The OR for aPoint is simple. It contains a pointer to aPoint’s class, a pointer
The figure shows complete method vectors
in each class, ordered in a prefix layout.
to aPoint’s method vector (from class Point), and space for the data mem-
bers of a Point.

The OR for aColorPoint is equally simple. It contains a pointer to
aColorPoint’s class, a pointer to its method vector (from class ColorPoint),
and space for the data members of a ColorPoint. The data members are
ordered in a prefix-layout scheme, following the discussion on layout for
single-inheritance from Section 5.6.3 on page 255. Thus, the inherited data
members, x, y, and z, sit at the same offsets as they would in an instance of
Point, and the data members declared in ColorPoint sit below them.

The OR for a class has a similar structure. Each OR of class class contains
a class pointer. Their code pointers, which are not shown, would lead to



■ FIGURE 6.3 Object Layout, Linking, and Inheritance.



the method vector in class class. The class ORs show the method vector
and superclass pointers. Undoubtedly, the OR’s of classes would contain
additional class-specific members.

Allocation of Object Records

ORs are allocated explicitly when an object is created and deallocated when
the object is no longer reachable. Most ORs are heap allocated, because
object lifetimes are not typically correlated to a single activation of some
method. If an object’s lifetime is bounded by some method’s activation,
then its OR can be stored inside the AR created for that method.

Analysis can reveal cases where a heap-allocated OR may be, instead,
placed inside some method’s AR. This transformation can reduce both allo-
cation overhead and the cost of heap management.

Method Invocation

How does the compiler generate code to invoke a method such as draw ?
Methods are always invoked relative to some receiver object, say an in-
stance of aColorPoint. For the invocation to be legal, aColorPoint must be
visible at the point of the call so that the compiler can discover how to find
aColorPoint with a symbol-table lookup. The compiler first looks in the
method’s lexical hierarchy, then in the class hierarchy, and, finally, in the
global scope. That lookup provides enough information to let the compiler
emit code to obtain aColorPoint’s ORP.

Once the compiler has emitted code to obtain the ORP, it can find and re-
trieve the code-vector pointer at a fixed offset from the ORP. The pointer
to draw is at a fixed offset from the start of the code vector. (As drawn, that
offset is zero.) The compiler can use draw’s address in a standard procedure
call, with one twist—the call passes aColorPoint’s ORP as draw’s implicit
first parameter, which is bound to a language-specified name such as this
or self.

Careful construction of the runtime data structures allows this strategy to
work. The code pointer in aColorPoint’s OR points to the method vector
from ColorPoint rather than the one from Point. Thus, invoking draw rela-
tive to aColorPoint calls ColorPoint.draw. Invoking draw relative to aPoint
would call Point.draw. Finally, casting aColorPoint to be a Point should
cause it to use Point’s method vector and call Point.draw.

The example in Fig. 6.3 shows each class with a complete method vec-
tor. Thus, ColorPoint’s method vector has pointers to ColorPoint.draw,
Point.move, and ColorPoint.setc. The vector embodies the result of resolv-
ing those names through the inheritance hierarchy. This scheme achieves



the intended result—an object of class x invokes the implementation of a
method that is visible from inside class x.

As an alternative, the compiler can represent only ColorPoint’s local meth-
ods in its class method vector. A method name would resolve to a coordinate
that told the compiler how far up the superclass chain it must run to find the
code pointer. The compiler would emit code to chase up the superclass chain
to the correct level and then retrieve the code pointer. Complete method vec-
tors save runtime at the expense of a minor increase in runtime space.

Static Versus Dynamic Dispatch

The discussion so far suggests that every method call requires a lookup
Dispatch
The process of calling a method is often
called dispatch, a term derived from the
message-passing model of OOLs such as
SMALLTALK.

through the receiver’s OR to locate the method’s implementation. In a lan-
guage with a closed class structure, the compiler can resolve the method
name to a specific implementation at compile time and generate a direct
call. In C++, for example, the compiler can resolve any method to a con-
crete implementation at compile time, unless the method is declared as a
virtual method—meaning, essentially, that the programmer wants to locate
the implementation relative to the receiver’s class.

With a virtual method, dispatch locates an implementation using the appro-
priate method vector. The compiler emits code to follow the path from OR
to class method vector to code pointer, a process often called dynamic dis-
patch. If, however, the C++ compiler can prove that some virtual method
call has a known invariant receiver class, it can generate a direct call, some-
times called static dispatch.

Languages with open class structures may need to rely on dynamic dispatch.
If the class structure can change at runtime, the compiler cannot resolve
method names to implementations; instead, it must defer this process to run-
time. The techniques used to address this problem range from recomputing
method vectors when the class hierarchy changes, to recompiling affected
classes with a JIT, to runtime name resolution and a runtime search in the
class hierarchy.

■
If the class hierarchy changes infrequently, the implementation may sim-
ply rebuild method vectors for the affected classes after each change. In
this scheme, the runtime system must traverse the superclass hierarchy to
locate method implementations when it builds subclass method vectors.
Changes in class structure invalidate any JIT-compiled code for related
methods (see Chapter 14).

■
If the class hierarchy changes often, the implementation may keep in-
complete method vectors in each class—that is, a class’ method vector
only holds pointers to methods that are local to that class. In this scheme,



METHOD CACHES
To support an open class hierarchy, the compiler may need to produce a
search key for each method name and maintain a runtime-searchable map
of ⟨class, key⟩ pairs to implementations. In such a scheme, method dispatch
includes a search, by key, through tables in the class hierarchy.

To improve method lookup in this situation, the runtime system can
implement a method cache—a software analog of a processor’s data cache.
Each method cache entry consists of a key, a class, and a code pointer.
A dynamic dispatch begins with a lookup in the method cache; if it finds the
⟨class, key⟩ pair then it returns the code pointer. If the lookup fails, the
dispatch searches up the superclass chain from the receiver’s class. When it
finds the method, it caches that result and returns the code pointer.

Of course, creating the new entry may force eviction of some other cache
entry. Standard cache replacement policies, such as least recently used or
round robin, can select the method to evict. Larger caches retain more
information, but require more memory and may take longer to search.

To capture type locality at individual calls, some systems use an inline method
cache, a single-entry cache located at each call site. The cache stores the
receiver’s class and the code pointer from the last execution of that site. If the
current receiver’s class matches the cached class, the call uses the cached
code pointer. If the current receiver’s class does not match the cached class,
a full lookup is performed; that lookup records its result in the cache.

A change to the class hierarchy must invalidate the affected entries in the
method caches. The implementation could clear the method cache and any
inline caches; they will refill as the code executes. An alternative solution that
works well with inline caches is to generate a new tag for each affected class.
The old tags will not match. New lookups will find the new methods. The
outdated entries will eventually be evicted.

a call to a superclass method triggers a runtime search in the class hier-
archy for the first method of that name.

In either case, the language runtime will need lookup tables of method
Keys might be kept in a table local to the
class; alternatively, the method vector could
consist of ⟨key,address⟩ pairs.
names—either source-level names or search keys derived from those names.
Conceptually, each class needs a small dictionary. Runtime name resolution
looks up the method name in the hierarchy, in a manner analogous to the
chain of symbol tables described in Section 4.5.1.

OOL implementations use two general strategies to reduce the cost of dy-
namic dispatch. They analyze the code to prove that a given call site always
uses a receiver of the same known class, in which case they rewrite the call
as a static dispatch. For calls where the receiver’s class either varies or is



unknown, the implementation can cache search results to speed up subse-
quent calls. In such a scheme, the dispatch search looks in a method cache
before it searches the class hierarchy. If the search finds the receiver’s class
and the method name in the cache, the call uses the cached method pointer.

SECTION REVIEW
Algol-like languages typically use lexical scoping, in which name spaces are
properly nested and new instances of a name obscure older ones. Each call
creates an activation record for the callee, which includes the callee’s local
data area. Object-oriented languages add an inheritance-based hierarchy to
the name space, based on the class definitions. This dual-hierarchy name
space leads to more complex interactions among names and to more
complex implementations.

Both styles of naming require runtime structures to reflect and implement
the naming hierarchy. In an ALL, activation records capture the structure of
the name space, provide the necessary storage for most values, and
preserve the state necessary for correct execution. In an OOL, activation
records for methods still capture the lexically scoped part of the name
space and the execution state. However, the implementation also needs a
hierarchy of object records to capture the inheritance-based name space.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In C, setjmp and longjmp provide a mechanism for interprocedural trans-
fer of control. setjmp builds a structure to encapsulate the runtime
environment; invoking longjmp on that environment restores the en-
vironment and lets execution continue as if the most recent setjmp had
just returned. What information must setjmp preserve? How does the
implementation of setjmp change between stack-allocated and heap-
allocated ARs?

2.
Consider the example from Fig. 6.3. If the programmer casts aColorPoint
to class Point, what actions must the generated code take to enforce
that cast and to produce the correct behavior? (Recall that the effect
of a cast is local, so that the code should not permanently change the
receiver’s OR.

6.4 PASSING VALUES BETWEEN PROCEDURES

The central notion underlying the concept of a procedure is abstraction. The
programmer abstracts common operations relative to a small set of names,



or formal parameters, and encapsulates those operations in a procedure. To
use the procedure, the programmer invokes it with an appropriate binding
of values, or actual parameters, to those formal parameters. The callee ex-
ecutes, using the formal parameter names to access the values passed as
actual parameters. If the programmer desires, the procedure can return a
result.

6.4.1 Passing Parameters

Parameter binding maps the actual parameters at a call site to the callee’s
formal parameters. It lets the programmer write a procedure without knowl-
edge of the contexts in which it may be called. It lets the programmer invoke
the procedure from many distinct contexts without exposing details of the
procedure’s internal operation to each of its callers. Thus, parameter binding
plays a critical role in our ability to write abstract, modular code.

Most modern programming languages use one of two conventions for map-
ping actual parameters to formal parameters: call-by-value binding and
call-by-reference binding. These techniques differ in their behavior. The
distinction between them may be best explained by understanding their im-
plementations.

Call by Value

Consider the following C code—a procedure fee and several call sites that
Call by value
a convention where the caller evaluates the
actual parameters and passes their values to
the callee

Any modification to a call-by-value param-
eter in the callee is not visible in the caller.

invoke fee:

int fee(int x, int y) {
x = 2 * x;
y = x + y;
return y;
}

c = fee(2,3);
a = 2;
b = 3;
c = fee(a,b);
a = 2;
b = 3;
c = fee(a,a);

With call-by-value parameter passing, as in C, the caller copies the value
of an actual parameter into the appropriate location for the corresponding
formal parameter—either a register or a parameter slot in the callee’s AR.
Only one name refers to that value—the name of the formal parameter. Its
value is an initial condition, determined by evaluating the actual parameter
at the time of the call. If the callee changes its value, that change is visible
inside the callee, but not in the caller.

The three invocations produce the following results when invoked using
call-by-value parameter binding:



Call by
a
b
Return

Value
in
out
in
out
Value

fee(2,3)
-
-
-
-
7

fee(a,b)
2
2
3
3
7

fee(a,a)
2
2
3
3
6

With call-by-value, the binding is simple and intuitive.

One variation on call-by-value binding is call-by-value-result binding. In
this scheme, the values of formal parameters are copied back into the cor-
responding actual parameters as part of the return from the callee. The
programming language ADA includes value-result parameters. Some FOR-

TRAN 77 implementations used value-result binding.

Call by Reference

With a call-by-reference parameter, the caller passes an address rather than a
Call by reference
a convention where the compiler passes
an address for the actual parameter to the
callee

If the actual parameter is a variable, then
changing the formal’s value also changes
the actual’s value.

value. If the actual parameter resides in memory, the caller passes its mem-
ory address. If the actual parameter is an expression, the caller evaluates the
expression, stores its value into the caller’s local data area, and passes the
address of that location. Values kept in registers and constants should be
handled in the same way as expressions. Inside the callee, each reference to
a formal parameter needs an extra level of indirection.

Call by reference differs from call by value in two critical ways. First, if the
caller passes a variable x as a call-by-reference actual parameter bound to y
in the callee, then any change to y is also a change to x. Second, if the callee
can access x directly, then it has two names inside the callee, which can lead
to counterintuitive behavior. When the callee has two names for one storage
location, we say that the names are aliases.

Consider the earlier example, rewritten in PL/I, which uses call-by-
reference parameter binding.

fee: procedure (x,y)
returns fixed binary;
declare x, y fixed binary;
x = 2 * x;
y = x + y;
return y;
end fee;

c = fee(2,3);
a = 2;
b = 3;
c = fee(a,b);
a = 2;
b = 3;
c = fee(a,a);

With call-by-reference parameter binding, the example produces different
results. The first call is straightforward. The second call redefines both a



and b; those changes would be visible in the caller. The third call causes
Alias
When two names can refer to the same
location, they are said to be aliases.

In the example, the call fee(a,a) creates an
alias between x and y inside fee.

x and y to refer to the same location, and thus, the same value. This alias
changes fee’s behavior. The first assignment sets both a and b to the value 4.
The second assignment then sets both a and b to the value 8, and fee re-
turns 8. A call to fee(2,2), with literal constants, would instead return 6.

Call by
a
b
Return

Reference
in
out
in
out
Value

fee(2,3)
-
-
-
-
7

fee(a,b)
2
4
3
7
7

fee(a,a)
2
8
3
3
8

Space for Parameters

The size of the representation for a parameter has an impact on the cost
of procedure calls. Scalar values, such as variables and pointers, are stored
in registers or in the parameter area of the callee’s AR. With call-by-value
parameters, the actual value is stored; with call-by-reference parameters, the
address of the parameter is stored. In either case, the cost per parameter is
small—typically a single store operation.

Large values, such as arrays, records, or structures, pose a problem for call
by value. If the language requires that large values be copied, the overhead
of copying them into the callee’s parameter area will add significant cost
to the procedure call. (In this case, the programmer may want to model
call by reference and pass a pointer to the entity rather than the entity it-
self.) Some languages allow the implementation to pass such entities by
reference. Other languages include provisions that let the programmer spec-
ify that passing a particular parameter by reference is safe and acceptable;
for example, adding the const attribute to a parameter in a C function proto-
type assures the compiler that the parameter is not modified by a call to the
function.

6.4.2 Returning Values

To return a value from a function, the compiler must set aside space for
With call-by-value parameters, some link-
age conventions designate the register
reserved for the first parameter as the regis-
ter to hold the return value.

the returned value. Because the return value, by definition, is used after the
callee terminates, it needs storage outside the callee’s AR. If the compiler
writer can ensure that the return value is of small fixed size, then it can store
the value either in the caller’s AR or in a designated register.

All of our pictures of the AR have included a slot for a returned value. To
use this slot, the caller allocates space for the returned value in its own AR



CALL-BY-NAME PARAMETER BINDING
ALGOL introduced call-by-name parameter binding. In call-by-name binding,
a reference to a formal parameter behaves as if the actual parameter had
been textually substituted in its place, with appropriate renaming. This
simple rule can lead to complex behavior. Consider the following short
example in ALGOL-60:

begin comment Simple array example;
procedure zero(Arr, i, j, u1, u2);
integer Arr, i, j, u1, u2;
begin;
for i := 1 step 1 until u1 do
for j := 1 step 1 until u2 do
Arr := 0;
end;

integer array Work[1:100,1:200];
integer p, q, x, y;

x := 100;
y := 200;

zero(Work[p,q], p, q, x, y);
end

The call to zero assigns zero to every element of the array Work. To see this,
rewrite zero with the text of the actual parameters.

While call-by-name binding was easy to define, it was difficult to implement
and to understand. In general, the compiler must produce, for each formal
parameter, a function that evaluates the actual parameter to return a pointer.
These functions are called thunks. Generating competent thunks was
complex; evaluating a thunk for each parameter access was expensive. In
the end, these disadvantages overcame any advantages that call-by-name
parameter binding offered.

The programming language R uses call-by-name to create lazy parameters.
A call creates and passes thunks, or promises. The code evaluates the thunk
when the parameter is first referenced and stores its result for later
references.

and stores a pointer to that space in the return-value slot of its own AR.
The callee can load the pointer from the caller’s return-value slot (using the
copy of the caller’s ARP that it has in the callee’s AR). With that pointer,
the callee can access the space in the caller’s AR set aside for the returned
value. As long as both caller and callee agree about the size and type of the
returned value, this approach works.



If the caller cannot know the size of the returned value, the callee may need
to allocate space for it, presumably on the heap. In this case, the callee
allocates the space, stores the returned value there, and stores the pointer
in the return-value slot of the caller’s AR. On return, the caller can access
the return value using the pointer that it finds in its return-value slot. The
heap space must be reclaimed, explicitly by the caller or implicitly through
collection.

If the return value is small—the size of the return-value slot or less— then
the compiler can eliminate the indirection. Instead, the callee can store the
value directly into the return value slot of the caller’s AR. The caller can then
use the value directly from its AR. This improvement requires, of course,
that the compiler handle the value in the same way in both the caller and
the callee. Fortunately, type signatures for procedures can ensure that both
compiles have the requisite information.

6.4.3 Establishing Addressability for Nonlocal
Variables

As part of the linkage convention, the compiler must ensure that each pro-
Base address
The address of the start of a data area is
often called a base address.
cedure can generate an address for each variable that it needs to reference.
In general, the address calculation consists of two portions: finding the base
address of the appropriate data area for the scope that contains the value, and
finding the correct offset within that data area. The problem of finding base
addresses divides into three cases: data areas with static base addresses, data
areas whose addresses cannot be known until runtime, and heap-allocated
objects.

Variables with Static Base Addresses

Compilers typically arrange for global data areas and static data areas to
have static base addresses. To generate an address for a variable in one of
these areas, the compiler emits code to compute the data area’s base address
into a register and to add the variable’s offset to that base address. These
computations are so common that most ISAs include address modes to rep-
resent them and to ensure that they execute efficiently. For example, ILOC
has a “register + immediate” mode (loadAI) and a “register + register”
mode (loadAO).

To generate the runtime address of a static base address, the compiler at-
taches a symbolic, assembly-level label to the data area. Depending on the
target machine’s instruction set, that label might be used in a load immedi-
ate operation or it might be used to initialize a slot in the constant pool, in
which case it can be moved into a register with a standard load operation.



The compiler constructs the label for a base address by mangling the name.
Name mangling
the process of constructing a unique string
from a source-language name
Typically, it adds a prefix, a suffix, or both to the original name, using char-
acters that are legal in the assembly code but not in the source language. For
example, mangling the global variable name fee might produce the label
&fee.; the label is then attached to an assembly-language pseudooperation
that reserves space for fee. To move the address into a register, the compiler
If the value of &fee. is too long for an
immediate load operation, the compiler
may need to store the address in a known
location and load it from there.

might emit an operation such as loadI &fee. ⇒ ri. Subsequent operations
can then use ri to access the memory location for fee. The label becomes a
relocatable symbol for the assembler and the loader, which convert it into a
runtime virtual address.

Global variables may be labeled individually or in larger groups. In FOR-

TRAN, for example, the language collects global variables into common
blocks. A typical FORTRAN compiler establishes one label for each com-
mon block. It assigns an offset to each variable in each common block and
generates load and store operations relative to the common block’s label. If
the data area is larger than the offset allowed in a “register + offset” oper-
ation, it may be advantageous to have different labels for different parts of
the data area.

Similarly, the compiler may combine all the static variables in a single scope
into one data area. This reduces the likelihood of an unexpected naming
conflict; such conflicts are discovered during linking or loading and can
be confusing to the programmer. To avoid such conflicts, the compiler can
base the label on a globally visible name associated with the scope. This
strategy decreases the number of base addresses in use at any time, which
may reduce demand for registers. Using too many registers to hold base
addresses may adversely affect overall runtime performance.

Local Variables of the Current Procedure

Accessing a local variable of the current procedure is straightforward. While
its virtual address is unknowable at compile time, its base address is simply
the address of the current AR, recorded in the ARP. Further, the compiler
knows the variable’s offset in the local data area of that AR. (The com-
piler assigned that offset during storage assignment and carried it in the
variable’s static coordinate.) Thus, the compiler can emit code that adds
the variable’s offset to the ARP to produce its virtual address. Almost all
processors provide an address mode to support this kind of base + offset
memory operation. In ILOC those operations are loadAI, loadAO, storeAI,
and storeAO.

In some cases, a value is not stored at a constant offset from the ARP.
The value might reside in a register, in which case loads and stores are not



needed. If the variable has an unpredictable or changing size, the compiler
will store it in an area reserved for variable-size objects, either at the end of
the local data area or in the heap. In this case, the compiler can reserve space
in the AR for a pointer to the variable’s actual location, access the pointer
through an ARP + offset operation, and then use the pointer to access the
variable.

Local Variables of Other Procedures

To access a local variable of some enclosing lexical scope, the compiler
must arrange for the construction of runtime data structures that support the
task of finding the local data areas of such scopes. It must also emit code
that uses those structures to find the needed virtual address.

For example, assume that procedure fee, at lexical level m, references vari-
able x defined at lexical level n in procedure fie, n < m. The parser can
construct the static coordinate for x, ⟨n, o⟩, where o is x’s offset in the AR
for fie. To convert ⟨n, o⟩ into a runtime address, the compiler emits code
that uses n to find the ARP of the most-recently created level n procedure,
and then adds o to that ARP to compute x’s runtime virtual address.

Of course, this plan relies on the availability of runtime data structures that
can find the level n ARP. The compiler must emit code to build and maintain
those structures. The two most common methods are called access links and
a global display. The following subsections explore each of them.

Access Links

The intuition behind access links is simple. The compiler ensures that each

AR contains a pointer, called an access link or a static link, to the AR of its
immediate surrounding scope. The access links form a chain that includes
all the lexical ancestors of the current procedure, as shown in Fig. 6.4. Thus,
any local variable of another procedure that is visible to the current proce-
dure is stored in an AR on the chain of access links that begins in the current
procedure.

To access a value ⟨n,o⟩ from a level m procedure, the compiler emits code
to walk the chain of links and find the level n ARP. Next, it emits a load that
uses the level n ARP and o. To make this concrete, consider the program
represented by Fig. 6.4. Assume that m is 2 and that the access link is stored
at an offset of −4 from the ARP. The following table shows a set of three
different static coordinates alongside the ILOC code that a compiler might
generate for them. Each sequence leaves the result in r2.



■ FIGURE 6.4 Using Access Links.

Coordinate
Code

⟨2,24⟩
loadAI
rarp, 24
⇒ r2

⟨1,12⟩
loadAI
rarp, -4
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 12
⇒ r2

⟨0,16⟩
loadAI
rarp, -4
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, -4
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 16
⇒ r2

Since the compiler has the static coordinate for each reference, it can com-
pute the static distance (m−n), which tells it how many chain-following
loads to generate. The cost of the address calculation is proportional to the
static distance. If programs exhibit shallow lexical nesting, the difference in
cost between accessing two variables at different levels will be fairly small.

To maintain access links, the compiler must add code to each procedure call
that finds the appropriate ARP and stores it as the callee’s access link. For
a caller at level p and a callee at level q, three cases arise. If q = p + 1, the
callee is nested inside the caller, and the callee can use the caller’s ARP as
its access link. If q = p, the callee’s access link is the same as the caller’s
access link. Finally, if q < p, the callee’s access link is the level q − 1
access link for the caller. (If q is zero, the access link is null.) The compiler
can generate a sequence of p − q + 1 loads to find this ARP and store that
pointer as the callee’s access link.



■ FIGURE 6.5 Using a Global Display.

Global Display

In this scheme, the compiler allocates a single global array, called the dis-
play, to hold the ARP of the most recent activation of a procedure at each
lexical level. References to local variables of other procedures become in-
direct references through the display. To access a variable with static coor-
dinate ⟨n,o⟩, the compiler first retrieves the level n ARP from the display.
Then, it uses that ARP along with the offset o in a base + offset load or
store operation. References to local variables of the current procedure can
still use the ARP directly from rarp.

Fig. 6.5 shows the program state from Fig. 6.4 represented with a global
display instead of access links. The display has one entry per lexical level
in the program. The display, itself, can be statically allocated and assigned
a known mangled label. Unused display entries contain an invalid pointer.

Using the same static coordinates as in the discussion of access links, the
compiler might emit the following code for a display-based implementation.
Assume that the current procedure is at lexical level 2, and that the label

_&disp_: gives the display’s address.



Coordinate
Code

⟨2,24⟩
loadAI
rarp, 24
⇒ r2

⟨1,12⟩
loadI
_&disp_
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 4
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 12
⇒ r2

⟨0,16⟩
loadI
_&disp_
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 0
⇒ r1
loadAI
r1, 16
⇒ r2

With a display, the cost of nonlocal access is fixed. With access links, the
compiler generates a series of m − n loads; with a display, it uses n × l as an
offset into the display, where l is the length of a pointer (4 in the example).
Local access is still cheaper than nonlocal access, but with a display, the
penalty for nonlocal access is constant.

Of course, the compiler must insert code where needed to maintain the dis-
play. Thus, when procedure p at level n calls some procedure q at level n+1,
p’s ARP becomes the display entry for level n. (While p is executing, that
entry is unused.) The simplest way to maintain the display is to have p up-
p can save the old level n display entry in
the addressability slot of p’s own AR.
date the level n entry when control enters p, to replace that entry with its
own ARP, and to restore the original entry on exit from p.

The compiler can avoid some of these display updates. If procedure p does
To do a complete job of eliminating un-
needed updates, the compiler would need
to know which nonlocal variables each
procedure referenced.

not call procedures that are nested within it, then its own ARP cannot be
used in a nonlocal access and p need not update the display. This observation
eliminates many of the unneeded updates.

SECTION REVIEW
The ability to map values into and out of procedures is part of what makes
procedures useful. Two distinct mechanisms are involved: parameter
binding and direct access to names in surrounding scopes. For parameters,
languages specify different mechanisms that the compiler must implement.
For nonlocal accesses, the compiler must plan and maintain runtime
structures that point to the appropriate data areas.

The most confusing aspect of this material is the distinction between
compile-time actions, such as the parser computing a static distance
coordinate, and runtime actions, such as the code tracing up a chain of
access links. The compiler directly performs the compile-time actions. For
the runtime actions, it emits code to perform those actions at runtime.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
An early FORTRAN implementation had an odd bug. The short pro-
gram in the margin would print, as its result, the value 16. What did the
compiler do that led to this result? What should it have done instead?
(FORTRAN uses call-by-reference parameter binding.)

2.
One issue in the implementation of closures is the need to keep the
relevant ARs alive once a closure is created. What role can access links
or a display play in this process? Is one technique better than the other
in this situation?

subroutine change(n)
integer n
n = n * 2
end

program test
call change(2)
print *, 2 * 2
end

6.5 STANDARDIZED LINKAGES

The procedure linkage is a contract between the compiler, the operating
system, and the target machine that clearly divides responsibility for nam-
ing, allocation of resources, addressability, and protection. The procedure
linkage ensures interoperability of procedures between the user’s code, as
translated by the compiler, and code from other sources, including system
libraries, application libraries, and code written in other programming lan-
guages. Typically, all of the compilers for a given combination of target
machine and operating system use the same linkage, to the extent possible.

The linkage convention isolates each procedure from the different environ-
ments found at call sites that invoke it. Assume that procedure p has an
integer parameter x. Different calls to p might bind x to a local variable
stored in the caller’s stack frame, to a global variable, to an element of some
static array, or to the result of evaluating an integer expression such as y + 2.
Because the linkage convention specifies how to evaluate the actual param-
eter and store its value, as well as how to access x in the callee, the compiler
can generate code for the callee that ignores the differences between the run-
time environments at the different calls sites. As long as all the procedures
obey the linkage convention, the details will mesh to create the seamless
transfer of values promised by the source-language specification.

The linkage convention is, of necessity, machine dependent. For example, it
depends implicitly on information such as the number of registers available
on the target machine and the mechanisms for executing a call and a return.

Fig. 6.6 shows how the pieces of a standard procedure linkage fit together.
Each procedure has both a prolog and an epilog sequence. Each call site
includes both a precall and a postreturn sequence.



■ FIGURE 6.6 A Standard Procedure Linkage.

Precall Sequence

The precall sequence begins the process that both preserves the caller’s en-
If a call-by-reference parameter resides in a
register at the call site, the precall may need
to store it into the caller’s AR to create an
address to pass to the callee.

vironment and creates the callee’s environment. It allocates space for the
callee’s AR. It evaluates the actual parameters and stores the values or ad-
dresses in the designated slot in the callee’s AR. It stores the address of the
postreturn sequence as the return address. It stores the caller’s ARP in the
callee’s AR. It saves any caller-saves registers that must be preserved into
the register-save area of the caller’s AR. It may also perform maintenance
on the addressability data structures: the access links or the display.

To activate the callee, the precall sequence writes the callee’s ARP into the
register designated to hold the current ARP and jumps to the callee’s prolog
code.

Prolog Sequence

The prolog sequence finishes the process that both preserves the caller’s
environment and creates the callee’s new environment. It saves any callee-
saves registers that the callee will use. It may need to allocate space for
the callee’s local data area. It may need to load the base addresses for any
static or global data areas that the callee references. It may also perform
maintenance on the addressability data structures: the access links or the
display. Finally, it performs any initializations of local variables. At that
point, it begins to execute the code for the callee’s body.

Epilog Sequence

The epilog sequence starts the process that dismantles the callee’s environ-
ment and reestablishes the caller’s environment. If the procedure returns a



value, the epilog may store that value into the address specified by the caller.
(Alternatively, the code generated for a return statement may perform this
task.) The epilog restores any callee-saves registers that the prolog saved.
It may also perform maintenance on the addressability data structures: the
access links or the display. If the callee’s local data area was allocated sep-
arately from its AR, the epilog frees that space. Finally, it loads the return
address, restores the caller’s ARP, and jumps to the return address.

Postreturn Sequence

The postreturn sequence completes the process that restores the caller’s en-
vironment. It frees the callee’s AR. It restores any call-by-reference actual
parameters that need to be returned to registers. It restores any caller-saves
registers that the precall sequence saved. Finally, it continues execution of
the caller at the point after the call.

This framework provides general guidance for building a linkage conven-
tion. Many of the tasks can be shifted between caller and callee. In general,
moving work into the prolog and epilog code produces more compact code.
The precall and postreturn sequences are generated for each call, while the
prolog and epilog occur once per procedure. If procedures are called, on
average, more than once, then there are fewer prolog and epilog sequences
than precall and postreturn sequences.

Many of the values shown in the AR diagrams can be passed to the callee
in registers. The return address, the address for the return value, and the
caller’s ARP are obvious candidates. Many conventions pass the first k ac-
tual parameters in registers—a typical value for k might be 3 or 4. If the call
has more than k parameters, the remaining actual parameters can be stored
in the callee’s AR.

Saving Registers

At some point in the call sequence, any register values that the caller expects
A value is live across a call if its value is
created before the call and that value is used
after the call.
to survive across the call must be saved into memory. Either the caller or the
callee can perform the actual save; each choice has advantages and disad-
vantages. If the caller saves the registers, it can avoid saving values that it
knows are not live across the call; that knowledge might allow it to save and
restore fewer values. Similarly, if the callee saves the registers, it can avoid
saving values in registers that it does not use; again, knowledge of register
use in the callee might reduce saves and restores at the call.

In general, the compiler can use its knowledge of the procedure being com-
piled to optimize register save behavior. For any specific division of labor
between caller and callee, we can construct programs for which it works



MORE ABOUT TIME
In a typical system, the linkage convention is negotiated between compiler
writers and operating-system implementors at an early stage of system
development. Thus, issues such as the distinction between caller-saves and
callee-saves registers are decided at design time. When the compiler runs, it
must emit procedure prolog and epilog sequences for each procedure,
along with precall and postreturn sequences for each call site. This code
executes at runtime. The compiler cannot know the return address that it
should store into a callee’s AR. (Neither can it know, in general, the address of
that AR.) It can, however, include a mechanism that will generate the return
address at link time (using a relocatable assembly language label) or at
runtime (using some offset from the program counter) and store it into the
appropriate location in the callee’s AR.

Similarly, in a system that uses a display to provide addressability for local
variables of other procedures, the compiler cannot know the runtime
addresses of the display or the AR. Nonetheless, it emits code to maintain
the display. The mechanism that achieves this requires two pieces of
information: the lexical nesting level of the current procedure and the
address of the global display. The former is known at compile time; the latter
can be determined at link time by using a relocatable assembly language
label. Thus, the prolog can simply load the current display entry for the
procedure’s level (using a loadAO from the display address) and store it into
the AR (using a storeAO relative to the ARP). Finally, it stores the address of
the new AR into the display slot for the procedure’s lexical level.

well and programs for which it does not. Most modern systems take a middle
ground and designate a portion of the register set for caller-saves treatment
and a portion for callee-saves treatment. In practice, this seems to work well.
It encourages the compiler to put long-lived values in callee-saves registers,
where they will be stored only if the callee actually needs the register. It
encourages the compiler to put short-lived values in caller-saves registers,
where it may avoid saving them at a call.

Allocating the Activation Record

In the general case, both the caller and the callee need access to the callee’s

AR. Unfortunately, the caller cannot know, in general, how large the callee’s

AR must be (unless the compiler and linker can contrive to have the linker
paste the appropriate values into each call site).

With stack-allocated ARs, a middle ground is possible. Since allocation con-
sists of incrementing the stack-top pointer, the caller can begin the creation
of the callee’s AR by bumping the stack top and storing values into the



appropriate places. When control passes to the callee, it can extend the par-
tially built AR by incrementing the stack top to create space for local data.
The postreturn sequence can then reset the stack-top pointer, performing the
entire deallocation in one step.

With heap-allocated ARs, it may not be possible to extend the callee’s AR
incrementally. In this situation, the compiler writer has three choices.

1. The compiler can pass the values that it must store in the callee’s AR
in registers or in the caller’s own AR. The prolog sequence can then al-
locate an appropriately sized AR and store the passed values in it. The
parameter values might go into the caller’s AR. Access to those param-
eters could use the copy of the caller’s ARP that is saved in the callee’s

AR.
2. The compiler writer can split the AR into multiple distinct pieces: one to
hold the parameter and control information generated by the caller and
the others to hold space needed by the callee but of a size unknown to
the caller. Because the caller cannot, in general, know how large to make
the local data area, it can let the callee allocate its own local data area.
The callee might dedicate a register to hold the base address of that local
data area.
3. The compiler could use a scheme where each procedure creates an ini-
tialized static constant using a mangled label. The compiler can store
procedure fee’s local data area size in a label mangled from “fee.”
Any call to fee can load that constant and use it to size the local data
area.

Heap-allocated ARs increase the cost of a procedure call. Careful imple-
mentation can reduce those costs.

Managing Displays and Access Links

Whether the compiler writer chooses to use access links or a display, either
mechanism requires some work in the calling sequence. With a display, the
prolog updates the display record for its own level and the epilog restores
it. If the procedure never calls a more deeply nested procedure, it can skip
this step. With access links, the precall must find the appropriate first access
link for the callee. The amount of work varies with the difference in lexical
level between caller and callee. As long as the callee is known at compile
time, either scheme is reasonably efficient. If the callee is unknown (if it is,
for example, a function-valued parameter), the compiler may need to emit
special-case code to perform the appropriate steps.



SECTION REVIEW
The linkage convention is a social contract between the compiler, the
operating system, and the underlying hardware. It governs the transfer of
control between procedures, the preservation of the caller’s state, the
creation of the callee’s state, and the rules for passing values between them.

Standardized linkages enable the assembly of executable programs from
code written by different people and compiled at different times. They
ensure that each procedure can operate safely and correctly. The same
conventions let applications invoke system calls and library routines. While
the details of the linkage convention vary across systems, the basic concepts
are similar across most target machines, operating systems, and compilers.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
What role does the linkage convention play in the construction of in-
terlanguage programs? What facts might the compiler need to know
in order to generate code for an interlanguage call?

2.
If, at a call, the compiler knows that the callee does not contain any
procedure calls, what steps might it omit from the calling sequence?
Are there fields in the AR that the callee would never need?

6.6 ADVANCED TOPICS

The compiler must arrange for the allocation of space to hold both user
defined data and runtime support structures. Often, those structures have
lifetimes that do not fit well into the first-in first-out discipline of a stack.
In such cases, the language implementation allocates space in the runtime
heap—a region of memory set aside for such objects and managed by rou-
tines in a runtime support library. The compiler must also arrange storage
for other objects that have lifetimes unrelated to the flow of control, such as
most of the objects in a JAVA program.

We assume a simple interface to the heap, namely, a routine allocate(size)
and a routine free(address). The allocate routine takes an integer argu-
ment size and returns the address of a block of space in the heap that
contains at least size bytes. The free routine takes the address of a block of
previously allocated space in the heap and returns it to the pool of free space.
The critical issues that arise in designing algorithms for explicitly manag-
ing the heap are the efficiency of both allocate and free and the extent to
which the pool of free space becomes fragmented into small blocks.



This section sketches the algorithms involved in allocation and reclamation
of space in a runtime heap. Section 6.6.1 describes first-fit allocation for
the heap and expands on that technique to develop the notion of multipool
allocators. Section 6.6.2 examines implicit schemes for storage deallocation
and reclamation, which eliminate the need for the code to explicitly free
heap-based storage.

6.6.1 Explicit Heap Management

Most language implementations include a runtime system that provides sup-
port functions for the code generated by the compiler. That support typically
includes routines to manage a runtime heap. The heap management support
may be language specific, as in a SCHEME interpreter or a JAVA virtual
machine, or it may be part of the operating system, as in the POSIX imple-
mentations of malloc and free.

Many techniques have been proposed to implement allocate and free.
Most of those implementations share common strategies and insights. This
section explores a simple strategy, first-fit allocation, that exposes most of
the issues, and then shows how a strategy such as first fit is used to imple-
ment a modern allocator.

First-Fit Allocation

The primary focus of a first-fit allocator is the speed of allocate and free.
Speed takes precedence over efficient use of memory. Blocks contain a hid-
den size field, typically located before the address returned by allocate; see
Fig. 6.7(a). The allocator maintains a list of available blocks, called the free
list. Blocks on the free list have additional fields, as shown in Fig. 6.7(b).
Each free block keeps a pointer to the next block on the free list (set to
null in the last block) and a pointer to the block itself in its last word of the
block. The allocator initializes the heap to contain a single large block of
free memory.

A call to allocate(k) causes the following sequence of events: The
To reduce fragmentation, the allocator
can maintain a minimum block size, s. It
will then only split a block if both of the
resulting blocks have size greater than or
equal to s.

allocate routine walks the free list until it discovers a block with size
greater than or equal to k plus one word for the size field. Assume that
it finds an appropriate block, bi. It removes bi from the free list. If bi is
larger than necessary, allocate creates a new free block from the excess
space at the end of bi, updates all of the relevant fields in bi and the new
block, and puts the new block on the free list. Finally, allocate returns a
pointer to the appropriate offset inside bi.

If allocate does not find a large enough block, it tries to extend the heap. If
it succeeds, it returns a block of appropriate size from this newly allocated
portion of the heap. If extending the heap fails, allocate reports failure.



■ FIGURE 6.7 Blocks in a First-Fit Allocator.

To deallocate a block, the program calls free with the address of the block,
bj. The simplest implementation of free adds bj to the head of the free list
and returns. This approach is fast. Unfortunately, it leads to an allocator that,
over time, fragments memory into small blocks.

To overcome this flaw, the allocator can use the pointer at the end of a freed
block to coalesce adjacent free blocks. The free routine loads the word
preceding bj’s size field, which is the end-of-block pointer for the block that
immediately precedes bj in memory. If that word contains a valid pointer,
and it points to a matching block header (one whose address plus size field
points to the start of bj), then both bj and its predecessor are free. The free
routine can combine them by increasing the predecessor’s size field and
storing the appropriate pointer at the end of bj. If the predecessor block is
allocated, then free adds bj to the start of the free list.

To make this scheme work, allocate and free must maintain the end-of-
block pointers. Each time that free processes a block, it must update that
pointer with the address of the head of the block. The allocate routine must
invalidate either the next pointer or the end-of-block pointer to prevent free
from coalescing a freed block with an allocated block in which those fields
have not been overwritten.

The free routine can also try to combine bj with its successor in memory,
bk. It can use bj’s size field to locate the start of bk. It can use bk’s size field
and end-of-block pointer to determine if bk is free. If bk is free, then free can
combine the two blocks by removing bk from the free list, adding bj to the
free list, and updating bj’s size field and end-of-block pointer appropriately.
To make the free-list update efficient, the free list should be a doubly-linked
list. The overhead for the doubly-linked list is minimal.

As described, the coalescing scheme depends on the fact that the relation-
ship between the pointers in a free block will not occur in an allocated block.
While it is extremely unlikely that the allocator will identify an allocated
block as free, it could happen. To ensure against this event, the implementor
can require that the end-of-block pointer exists in both allocated and free
blocks. If allocate sets the pointer to zero and free sets it to the block’s
own address, the allocator should never misidentify an allocated block.



ARENA-BASED ALLOCATION
Inside the compiler itself, the compiler writer may find it profitable to use a
specialized allocator. Compilers have phase-oriented activity, which lends
itself well to an arena-based allocation scheme.

With an arena-based allocator, the program creates an arena—a pool of
contiguous memory in the heap—at the beginning of an activity. It uses the
arena to hold allocated objects that are related in their use. Calls to allocate
objects in the arena are satisfied in a stack-like fashion. An allocation involves
incrementing a pointer to the arena’s high-water mark and returning a
pointer to the newly allocated block. No call is used to deallocate individual
objects; they are freed en masse when the arena that contains them is
deallocated.

The arena-based allocator is a compromise between traditional allocators
and collecting allocators. With an arena-based allocator, the calls to allocate
can be made lightweight (as in a multipool allocator). No freeing calls are
needed; the program frees the entire arena in a single call when it finishes
the activity for which the arena was created.

Many variations on first-fit allocation have been tried. They trade off the
cost of allocate, the cost of free, the amount of fragmentation produced
by a long series of allocations, and the amount of space wasted by returning
blocks larger than requested.

Multipool Allocators

Multipool allocators build on first-fit allocation but simplify it based on ob-
servations about the behavior of programs. As memory sizes grew in the
early 1980s, it became reasonable to waste some space if doing so led to
faster allocation. At the same time, studies of program behavior suggested
that real programs allocate memory frequently in a few common sizes and
infrequently in large or unusual sizes.

Modern allocators use separate memory pools for several common sizes.
Typically, selected sizes are powers of two, starting with a small block size
(such as 32 or 64 bytes) and running up to the size of a virtual-memory
page (typically 4096 or 8192 bytes). Each pool has only one size of block,
so allocate can return the first block on the appropriate free list, and free
can simply add the block to the head of the appropriate free list. For re-
quests larger than a page, a separate first-fit allocator is used. Allocators
based on these ideas are fast. They work particularly well for heap alloca-
tion of ARs.



These changes simplify both allocate and free. The allocate routine must
check for an empty free list and add a new page of appropriately sized blocks
to the free list if it is empty. The free routine inserts the freed block at the
head of the free list for its size. A careful implementation could determine
the size of a freed block by checking its address against the memory seg-
ments allocated for each pool. Alternative schemes include using a size field
as before, and, if the allocator places all the storage on a page into a single
pool, storing the size of the blocks in a page in a designated word on the
page.

Debugging Help

Programs written with explicit allocation and deallocation are notoriously
Decades of experience suggest that pro-
grammers are not effective at freeing all the
storage that they allocate. They also tend to
free objects to which they retain pointers.
Implicit deallocation fixes both problems.

difficult to debug. It appears that programmers have difficulty deciding
when to free heap-allocated objects. If the allocator can quickly distinguish
between an allocated object and a free object, then the heap-management
software can provide the programmer with some help in debugging.

For example, to coalesce adjacent free blocks, the allocator needs a pointer
from the end of a block back to its head. If an allocated block has that
pointer set to an invalid value, then the deallocation routine can check that
field and report a runtime error when the program attempts to deallocate a
free block or an illegal address—a pointer to anything other than the start of
an allocated block.

For a modest additional overhead, heap-management software can provide
additional help. By linking together allocated blocks, the allocator can cre-
ate an environment for memory-allocation debugging tools. A snapshot tool
can walk the list of allocated blocks. Tagging blocks by the call site that
created them lets the tool expose memory leaks. Timestamping them allows
the tool to provide the programmer with detailed information about memory
use. Tools of this sort can provide invaluable help in locating blocks that are
never deallocated.

6.6.2 Implicit Deallocation

Many programming languages support implicit deallocation of heap objects.
Garbage collection
the implicit deallocation of objects on the
runtime heap

Dead
An object is dead when the running code
can no longer reach it.

The runtime system deallocates memory objects automatically when they
are no longer in use. To perform implicit deallocation, or garbage collection,
the compiler and runtime system must include a mechanism for determin-
ing when an object is no longer of interest, or dead, and a mechanism for
reclaiming and recycling the dead space.

The work associated with storage reclamation can be performed incremen-
tally for individual statements, or it can be performed as a batch-oriented



task that runs on demand when the free-space pool is exhausted. Reference
counting is a classic technique for incremental reclamation. Mark-sweep
collection is a classic approach to performing batch-oriented reclamation.

Reference Counting

This technique adds a counter to each heap-allocated object. The counter
tracks the number of outstanding pointers, or references, that refer to the
object. When the allocator creates the object, it sets the reference count to
one. Each assignment to a pointer variable adjusts two reference counts.
It decrements the reference count of the pointer’s preassignment object and
increments the reference count of the pointer’s postassignment object. When
an object’s reference count drops to zero, no pointer exists that can reach the
object, so the system may safely free the object.

Freeing an object can, in turn, discard pointers to other objects. The code
must then decrement the reference counts of those objects. For example,
discarding the last pointer to a tree’s root should free the entire tree. When
the root node’s reference count drops to zero, it is freed and its descendants’
reference counts are decremented. This, in turn, should free the descendants,
decrementing the counts of their children. This process continues until the
entire tree has been freed.

The presence of pointers in allocated objects creates several challenges for
reference-counting schemes, as follows:

1. The code needs a way to distinguish a pointer from other data in the ob-
ject. The system can keep a header field on each object where it stores
extra information, such as a bitmap that identifies which words in the
object are pointers. It can limit the range of pointers to less than a full
word and use the remaining high-order bits to “tag” the pointer. It can
keep detailed type information at runtime and use that to identify point-
ers. Note that batch collectors face this same issue and use the same
solutions.
2. A decrement to one reference count, such as the root of a tree, can create
a large amount of work. If external constraints require bounded deallo-
cation times, as in real-time systems, the runtime system can adopt a
scheme that limits the number of objects freed on each pointer assign-
ment. It can keep a queue of objects to free and limit the number freed
on each reference-count adjustment. This approach distributes the cost
over a larger set of operations and bounds the work done per assign-
ment.
3. The program might build a cyclic structure in the heap. The reference
counts in a cyclic data structure will not reach zero. When the last



external pointer is discarded, the cycle becomes unreachable; its stor-
age cannot be freed by the reference count mechanism. To ensure that
cyclic structures are freed, the programmer must break the cycle before
discarding the last pointer to the cycle. Many heap-allocated objects,
such as variable-length strings and ARs, cannot be involved in such cy-
cles.

Reference counting incurs additional work on every pointer assignment. The
amount of work done for a specific pointer assignment can be bounded; in
any well-designed scheme, the total cost can be limited to some constant
factor times the number of pointer assignments executed plus the number of
objects allocated. Proponents of reference counting argue that these over-
heads are small enough and that the pattern of reuse in reference-counting
systems produces good program locality. Opponents of reference count-
ing argue that real programs do more pointer assignments than allocations,
so that garbage collection achieves equivalent functionality with less total
work.

Batch Collectors

Batch collectors consider deallocation only when the free-space pool has
been exhausted. When the allocator fails to find needed space, it invokes
the batch collector. The collector pauses the program’s execution, exam-
If the collector cannot free any space, then
it must request additional space from the
system. If none is available, allocation fails.
ines the pool of allocated memory to discover unused objects, and reclaims
their space. When the collector terminates, the free-space pool should be
nonempty. The allocator can finish its original task and return a newly al-
located object to the caller. (As with reference counting, schemes exist that
perform collection incrementally to amortize the cost over longer periods of
execution.)

Logically, batch collectors proceed in two phases. The first phase discov-
ers the set of objects that can be reached from pointers stored in program
variables and compiler-generated temporaries. The collector conservatively
assumes that any object reachable in this manner is live and that the remain-
der is dead. The second phase deallocates and recycles dead objects. Two
commonly used techniques are mark-sweep collectors and copying collec-
tors. They differ in their implementation of the second phase of collection—
recycling.

Identifying Live Data

Collecting allocators discover live objects with a marking algorithm. The
collector needs a bit for each object in the heap, called a mark bit. Concep-
tually, think of the mark bits as stored in the objects. Mark bits should be
created in the “unmarked” or “clear” state.



Clear all marks

Worklist ← { pointer values from activation records & registers }

while (Worklist ̸= ∅) do

remove p from the Worklist

if (p→object is unmarked) then

mark p→object

add pointers from p→object to Worklist

■ FIGURE 6.8 A Simple Marking Algorithm.

The initial step of the sweep phase builds a worklist that contains all the
pointers stored in registers and in variables accessible to active procedures.
The second phase of the algorithm walks forward from these pointers and
marks every object that is reachable from this set of visible pointers.

Fig. 6.8 shows a high-level sketch of a simple marking algorithm. It halts
because the heap is finite and the marks ensure that each pointer enters the

Worklist at most once. The cost of marking is proportional to the number of
pointers that it examines.

The marking algorithm can be either precise or conservative. The difference
lies in how the algorithm determines that a specific data value is a pointer in
the final line of the while loop.

■
In a precise marking phase, the compiler and runtime system know the
type and layout of each object. This information can be recorded in ob-
ject headers, or it can be known implicitly from the type system. Either
way, the marking phase only follows real pointers.

■
In a conservative marking phase, the compiler and runtime system may
be unsure about the type and layout of some objects. Thus, when an
object is marked, the system considers each field that may be a possible
pointer. If its value might be a pointer, it is treated as a pointer. Any
value that does not represent a word-aligned address might be excluded,
as might values that fall outside the known boundaries of the heap.

Conservative collectors have limitations. They fail to reclaim some objects
that a precise collector would find. Nonetheless, conservative collectors
have been successfully retrofitted into implementations for languages such
as C that do not normally support garbage collection.

When the marking algorithm halts, any unmarked object must be unreach-
able from the program. Thus, the second phase of the collector can treat that
object as dead. Some objects marked as live may also be dead. However, the
collector lets them survive because it cannot prove them to be dead. As the



second phase traverses the heap to collect unused storage, it can clear the
mark bits.

Mark-Sweep Collectors

Mark-sweep collectors reclaim and recycle objects in a linear pass over the
heap. The collector adds each unmarked object to the free list (or one of the
free lists) where the allocator will find it and reuse it. With a single free list,
the same collection of techniques used to coalesce blocks in the first-fit allo-
cator applies. To compact the heap, the collector can incrementally shuffle
live objects downward during the sweep or with a postsweep compaction
pass.

Copying Collectors

Copying collectors divide memory into two pools, an old pool and a new
pool. The allocator always operates from the old pool. The simplest copying
collectors are called stop and copy collectors. When an allocation fails, a
stop and copy collector copies all the live data from the old pool into the
new pool and swaps the identities of the old and new pools. The act of
copying live data compacts it; after collection, all the free space is in a single
contiguous block.

Copying can be done in a separate pass, as in mark sweep, or it can be
performed incrementally, as live data is identified. An incremental scheme
can mark objects in the old pool as it copies them to avoid copying the same
object multiple times.

Generational collectors are an important family of copying collectors. They
capitalize on the observation that once an object survives one collection, it
is more likely to survive subsequent collections. A generational collector
uses two “new” pools that it maintains by copying; these pools are some-
times called nurseries. A generational collector also maintains one or more
older or stable pools. When the nursery becomes too crowded, the alloca-
tor collects and copies the live data from the nursery into the stable pool.
Successive collections of the nursery only examine newly allocated objects.
Generational schemes vary in terms of how many stable pools they maintain
and how often they collect those stable pools.

Comparing the Techniques

Garbage collection frees the programmer from thinking about when to re-
lease memory and from tracking down the inevitable storage leaks that result
from explicit deallocation. While the individual schemes have strengths and



weaknesses, the practical benefits of implicit deallocation outweigh the dis-
advantages for most applications.

Reference counting distributes the cost of deallocation more evenly across
program execution than does batch collection. However, it increases the cost
of every assignment that involves a heap-allocated value—even if the pro-
gram never runs out of free space. By contrast, batch collectors incur no
cost until the allocator fails to find needed space. At that point, however, the
program incurs the full cost of collection. Furthermore, any allocation can
provoke a collection.

Mark-sweep collectors examine the entire heap, while copying collectors
only examine the live data. Copying collectors actually move every live ob-
ject, while mark-sweep collectors leave them in place. The tradeoff between
these costs will vary with the application’s behavior and with the actual costs
of various memory references.

Reference-counting implementations and conservative batch collectors have
problems recognizing cyclic structures because they cannot distinguish be-
tween references from within the cycle and those from without. The mark-
PYTHON reference counts objects, but
invokes a batch collector when it exhausts
the heap. The batch collector can reclaim
“lost” cyclic structures.

sweep collectors start from an external set of pointers, so they discover that
a dead cyclic structure is unreachable. The copying collectors, starting from
the same set of pointers, simply fail to copy the objects involved in the cycle.

Copying collectors compact memory as a natural part of the process. The
collector can either update all the stored pointers, or it can require use of
an indirection table for each object access. A precise mark-sweep collector
can compact memory, too. The collector would move objects from one end
of memory into free space at the other end. Again, the collector can either
rewrite the existing pointers or mandate use of an indirection table.

In general, a good implementor can make both mark sweep and copying
work well enough that they are acceptable for most applications. In ap-
plications that cannot tolerate unpredictable overhead, such as real-time
controllers, the runtime system must incrementalize the process, as the
amortized reference-counting scheme does. Such collectors are called real-
time collectors.

6.7 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

The primary rationale for moving beyond assembly language was to provide
a more abstract programming model and produce improvements in pro-
grammer productivity and program understandability. The compiler must
be prepared to translate each abstraction that the source language provides.


ChapterNotes
319

This chapter explored techniques used to implement the abstractions intro-
duced by procedure calls.

Procedural programming was invented early in the history of programming.
Some of the first procedures were debugging routines written for early com-
puters. These prewritten routines allowed programmers to understand the
runtime state of an errant program. Without such routines, simple tasks, such
as examining the contents of a variable, tracing the call stack, or printing a
dump of the contents of memory, could only be achieved if the programmer
entered a long sequence of machine-language code without error.

The advent of lexical scoping in languages such as ALGOL 60 influenced
language design for decades. Most modern programming languages inherit
some of ALGOL’s philosophy on naming and addressability. Techniques
invented to reduce the runtime cost of lexical scoping, such as access links
and displays, are widely used today.

OOLs take the scoping concepts of ALLs and reorient them in data-directed
ways. These languages typically support both a lexical scoping hierarchy
and an inheritance hierarchy. The compiler for an OOL uses both compile-
time and runtime structures invented for lexical scoping to model and to
implement the naming discipline imposed by the inheritance hierarchy.

As new programming paradigms emerge, they will introduce new abstrac-
tions that require careful thought and implementation. By studying the suc-
cessful techniques of the past and understanding the constraints and costs
involved in real implementations, compiler writers will develop strategies
that decrease the runtime penalty for using higher levels of abstraction.

CHAPTER NOTES

Much of the material in this chapter comes from the accumulated experience
of the compiler-construction community. The best way to learn more about
the name-space structures of various languages is to consult the language
definitions themselves. These documents are a necessary part of a compiler
writer’s library.

Procedures appeared in the earliest high-level languages—that is, languages
that were more abstract than assembly language. FORTRAN [28] and AL-

GOL 60 [282] both had procedures with most of the features found in
modern languages. Early ALGOL 60 implementations developed many of
the key ideas that arise in linkage conventions; for example, Ingerman first
described thunks for call-by-name parameter passing in 1961 [213]. Object-
oriented languages appeared in the late 1960s with SIMULA-67 [287]



followed by SMALLTALK 72 [242]. The various SMALLTALK systems
used method caches to reduce the cost dynamic dispatch [137,242].

ALGOL 60 introduced lexical scoping; it persists to the present day. Early
ALGOL compilers introduced most of the support mechanisms described in
this chapter; they implemented activation records, access links, displays,
and parameter-passing techniques. Most of the ideas from Sections 6.3
through 6.5 were present in one or more of these early systems [303]. Opti-
mizations to the linkage convention quickly appeared, such as folding stor-
age for a block-level scope into the activation record for the procedure that
contained the block. Murtagh took a systematic approach to coalescing ac-
tivation records, combining the ARs of procedures that are frequently called
together [281]. The IBM 370 linkage convention recognized the difference
between leaf procedures and others; they avoided allocating a register save
area for leaf routines.

The classic reference on memory allocation schemes is Knuth’s Art of Com-
puter Programming [240, § 2.5]. Modern multipool allocators appeared in
the early 1980s. Reference counting dates to the early 1960s and has been
used in many systems [102,136]. Schorr and Waite describe an early mark-
ing algorithm [319]. Cohen and, later, Wilson provide broad surveys of the
literature on garbage collection [99,362]. Conservative collectors were in-
troduced by Boehm and Weiser [48,50,131]. Copying collectors appeared in
response to virtual memory systems [86,154]; they led, somewhat naturally,
to the generational collectors in widespread use today [255,349]. Hanson
introduced the notion of arena-based allocation [189].


Exercises
321

EXERCISES

1.
Show the call tree and execution history for the following C program:
Section 6.2

int Sub(int i, int j) {
return i - j;
}

int Mul(int i, int j) {
return i * j;
}

int Delta(int a, int b, int c) {
return Sub(Mul(b,b), Mul(Mul(4,a),c));
}

void main() {
int a, b, c, delta;

scanf("%d %d %d", &a, &b, &c);
delta = Delta(a, b, c);
if (delta == 0)
puts("Two equal roots");
else if (delta > 0)
puts("Two different roots");
else
puts("No root");
}

2.
Some programming languages allow the programmer to use functions in
Section 6.3
the initialization of local variables but not in the initialization of global
variables.

a.
Is there an implementation rationale to explain this seeming quirk
of the language definition?

b.
What mechanisms would be needed to allow initialization of a
global variable with the result of a function call?

3.
The compiler writer can optimize the allocation of ARs in several ways.
For example, the compiler might:

a.
Allocate ARs for leaf procedures statically.

b.
Combine the ARs for procedures that are always called together.
(When α is called, it always calls β.)

For each scheme, consider the following questions:

a.
What kind of calls might benefit from the optimization?

b.
How often do you expect such calls to occur in real programs?

c.
What is the impact of the optimization on runtime space utilization?



4.
Consider the following definition for class Dog and class Retriever.
Draw the structures that the compiler would need to create to support
objects of type Retriever, defined as follows:

class Dog {
private int Height;
private int Weight;
public int Sheds;

public int GetHeight();
public int GetWeight();
public boolean PlaysFetch();
}

class Retriever extends Dog {
private boolean Calm;
public boolean Disposition();
public boolean PlaysFetch();
}

The PlaysFetch method in Dog simply returns false, while the PlaysFetch
method in Retriever returns true. The Disposition method in Retriever
consults the boolean Calm.

5.
Consider the definitions of Dog and Retriever from the previous ques-
tion.

a.
If a program casts an object of class Retriever to be an object of
class Dog, an upcast, what differences in behavior occur? Opera-
tionally, how does this upcast work?

b.
If a program casts an object of class Dog to be an object of class

Retriever, a downcast, what differences in behavior would you ex-
pect to occur? What problems might arise from a downcast?

c.
What do you think is a reasonable way for the language to handle
attempted downcasts?

6.
As an alternative to a global method cache, an implementation could
maintain an inline cache at each call site—a single-entry cache to record
the class and method most recently invoked from that site.

Develop pseudocode to use and maintain such an inline method cache.
Explain the initialization of the inline method caches and any modifi-
cations to the general method lookup routine required to support inline
method caches.


Exercises
323

7.
Consider the following program written in PASCAL-like pseudocode:
Section 6.4

procedure main;
var a : array[1...3] of integer;
i : int;
procedure p2(e : integer);
begin
e := e + 3;
a[i] := 5;
i := 2;
e := e + 4;
end;
begin
a := [1, 10, 77];
i := 1;
p2(a[i]);
for i := 1 to 3 do
print(a[i]);
end.

Simulate its execution under call-by-value, call-by-reference, and call-
by-name parameter binding rules. Show the results of the print state-
ments in each case.

8.
The use of call-by-reference parameters can create situations where two
distinct parameters refer to the same memory location. Consider the
following PASCAL procedure, with parameters passed by reference:

procedure mystery(var x, y : integer);
begin
x := x + y;
y := x - y;
x := x - y;
end;

If the arithmetic does not produce either underflow or overflow:

a.
What result does mystery produce when it is called with two dis-
tinct variables, a and b?

b.
What would be the expected result if mystery is invoked with a sin-
gle variable a passed to both parameters? What is the actual result
in this case?

9.
Consider the PASCAL program shown in Fig. 6.9(a). Suppose that
the implementation uses ARs as shown in Fig. 6.9(b). (Some fields
have been omitted for simplicity.) The implementation stack allocates
the ARs, with the stack growing toward the top of the page. The ARP



■ FIGURE 6.9 Program for Exercise 9.

is the only pointer to the AR, so access links are previous values of the

ARP. Finally, Fig. 6.9(c) shows the initial AR for a computation.

a.
For the example program in Fig. 6.9(a), draw the set of its ARs
just prior to the return from function F1. Use the line numbers to
specify return addresses. Draw directed arcs for access links. Show
space for local variables and parameters. Label each AR with its
procedure name.

b.
Show the same state, assuming that the implementation uses a
global display rather than access links.

10.
For each of the following actions, does that action belong in the pre-
Section 6.5
call, prolog, epilog, or postreturn sequence? Give a short justification
for your answer.


Exercises
325

procedure main
integer a, b, c
b = a + c;
c = f1(a,b);
call print(c);
end;

procedure f1(integer x, y)
integer v;
v = x * y;
call print(v);
call f2(v);
return -x;
end;

procedure f2(integer q)
integer k, r;
···
k = q / r;
end;

■ FIGURE 6.10 Code for Exercise 12.

a.
store the caller-saves registers

b.
restore the callee-saves registers

c.
store the return value

d.
store the return address

e.
use the return address

11.
In the design of a linkage convention, some actions can move between
the precall sequence and the prolog, or between the epilog and the
postreturn sequence.

a.
Why might it be good to move something from the precall sequence
to the prolog? from the postreturn sequence to the epilog?

b.
What actions might you be tempted to move between these se-
quences?

12.
Assume that the compiler is capable of analyzing the code to determine
facts such as “from this point on, variable v is not used again in this
procedure” or “variable v has its next use in line 11 of this procedure,”
and that the compiler keeps all local variables in registers for the three
procedures shown in Fig. 6.10.

a.
Variable x in procedure f1 is live across two procedure calls. For the
fastest execution of the compiled code, should the compiler keep
x in a caller-saves register or a callee-saves register? Justify your
answer.

b.
Consider variables a and c in procedure main. Should the compiler
keep them in caller-saves registers or callee-saves registers, again
assuming that the compiler is trying to maximize the speed of the
compiled code? Justify your answer.


This page intentionally left blank




