Chapter7
Code Shape

ABSTRACT
To translate an application program, the compiler must map each source-
language statement into a sequence of one or more operations in the target
machine’s instruction set. The compiler must choose among many alterna-
tive ways to implement each construct. Those choices have a strong and
direct impact on the quality of the code that the compiler eventually pro-
duces.

This chapter explores some of the implementation strategies that the com-
piler can employ for a variety of common programming-language con-
structs, with an emphasis on how to map the source-level constructs into
the target machine’s instruction set. Topics include expression evaluation,
access methods for variables and aggregate data structures, control-flow
constructs, and procedure calls.

KEYWORDS
Code Generation, Code Quality, Control Structures, Expression Evaluation

7.1 INTRODUCTION

When the compiler translates application code into executable form, it faces
myriad choices about specific details, such as the organization of the compu-
tation and the location of data. Such decisions often affect the performance
of the resulting code. The compiler’s decisions are guided by information
that it derives, progressively, over the course of translation. The compiler
must encode that derived knowledge into the IR and its ancillary data struc-
tures. It encodes some of that knowledge directly in a transparent way. For
example, if x is declared as a 64-bit integer, the compiler records that fact in
the relevant symbol table.

Other facts are encoded implicitly. For example, if the compiler discovers
Ambiguity can be difficult to determine.
Some situations, such as an address-taken
scalar variable, are obvious. Others, such
as a C program that performs arithmetic on
pointers, can require complex analysis.

that y is a local scalar variable and it decides that y is unambiguous, the com-
piler might encode that decision by keeping y in a virtual register throughout
its lifetime. Encoding information about ambituity in this way makes the
fact obvious to the rest of the compiler and eliminates the need to rederive
this knowledge in later passes. We refer to this kind of implicit encoding of



knowledge into the IR program as code shape. The compiler writer makes
an explicit decision to shape the IR in a specific way to encode information
and, thus, expose it to later passes.

Conceptual Roadmap

The translation of source code into target-machine operations is one of the
fundamental acts of compilation. The compiler must have a plan for each
source-language construct. Many of the issues that arise when generating
IR in the compiler’s front end also arise when generating assembly code for
a real processor in its back end. The target processor may present a more
difficult problem due to finite resources and idiosyncratic features, but the
principles are the same.

This chapter focuses on ways to implement a variety of source-language
constructs in the compiler’s IR. In many cases, specific implementation de-
tails affect the compiler’s ability to analyze and to improve the code. The
concept of code shape encapsulates all of the decisions, large and small,
that the compiler writer makes about how to represent the computation in
both IR and assembly code form. Careful attention to code shape can sim-
plify the analysis and improvement of the code and can allow the compiler
to produce better final code.

A Few Words About Time

At design time, the compiler writer must choose how the IR form of the pro-
gram will express specific source-language constructs. Those decisions have
a direct impact on the efficiency of the final compiled code. This chapter
examines a number of source-language constructs and, when appropriate,
explores some of the options available to the compiler writer.

Code-shape decisions, made by the compiler writer at design time, can de-
termine the way that the compiler performs translation. To evaluate these
choices, the compiler writer needs to consider the impact that the choices
may have on later phases of the compiler and, eventually, on runtime perfor-
mance. Thus, this chapter focuses on the impact that design-time decisions
about the shape of the IR have on compile-time and runtime behavior.

Overview

In general, the compiler writer should focus on shaping the code so that later
passes in the compiler can produce high-quality code. In practice, a com-
piler has multiple choices for how to implement many source-language
constructs. These different options use different operations and different ap-
proaches. Some of these implementations are faster than others; some use



■ FIGURE 7.1 Alternate Code Shapes for x + y + z.

less memory; some use fewer registers; some might consume less energy
during execution. We consider these differences to be matters of code shape.

Code shape has a strong impact on both the behavior of the compiled code
and the ability of the optimizer and back end to improve the code. Consider,
for example, the translation of a C switch statement that selects one of 256
cases based on a single-byte character. The compiler might implement the
switch statement with a cascaded series of if–then–else statements. De-
pending on the layout of the tests, this could produce different results. If
the first test is for zero, the second for one, and so on, then this approach
devolves to linear search over the field of keys. If the tested characters are
uniformly distributed, the corresponding searches will, on average, test half
of the keys—an expensive way to implement a case statement.

On the other hand, the compiler might implement the switch statement as
a binary search over the keys. In this scheme, the average case would test
log2(|keys|), a more palatable number. To trade data space for speed, the
compiler could construct a table of 256 labels and interpret the character by
loading the corresponding table entry and jumping to it—with a constant
overhead per character.

All of these are legal implementations of the switch statement. Choosing
These three schemes are different enough
that an optimizer is unlikely to convert one
into another. The code-shape decision in
translation will determine the final code
shape for the switch statement.

the best implementation for a specific switch statement depends on many
factors. In particular, the number of cases and their relative execution fre-
quencies play a critical role in the decision. Even when the compiler cannot
determine these facts, it still must choose a strategy for each switch state-
ment. The differences among the possible implementations, and the com-
piler’s choice, are matters of code shape.

As another example, consider the simple expression x + y + z, where x, y, and
The figure assumes that each variable is
in a register and that the source language
does not specify the evaluation order for the
expression.

z are integers. Fig. 7.1 shows several ways to implement this expression. In
source-code form, we may think of the operation as a ternary add, shown
on the left. However, mapping this idealized operation into a sequence of



binary additions exposes the impact of evaluation order. The three versions
on the right show three possible evaluation orders, both as three-address
code and as abstract syntax trees. If addition is commutative and associative,
as integers are, all three orders are equivalent; the compiler must choose one.

Left associativity would produce the first binary tree. This tree seems “nat-
ural” in that left associativity corresponds to the left-to-right reading style
of programming languages. Consider what happens if we replace y with the
literal constant 2 and z with 3. Of course, x + 2 + 3 is equivalent to x + 5. The
compiler should detect the computation of 2 + 3, evaluate it, and fold the re-
sult directly into the code. In both (x + y) + z and (x + z) + y, the code never
evaluates 2 + 3. By contrast, (y + z) + x explicitly computes 2 + 3 and exposes
the opportunity to replace the subtree with 5. For each prospective tree, how-
ever, there is an assignment of variables and constants to x, y, and z that does
not expose the constant expression for optimization.

Again, the compiler cannot choose the best shape for this expression unless
it understands the surrounding context. If, for example, the expression x + y
was computed recently and the values of neither x nor y have changed, then
using the leftmost shape would let the compiler replace the first operation,

r1 ← rx + ry, with a reference to the previously computed value. Often, the
best evaluation order depends on context from the surrounding code.

This chapter explores the code-shape issues that arise in implementing many
common source-language constructs. It focuses on the code that should
be generated for specific constructs, while largely ignoring the algorithms
required to pick specific assembly-language instructions. The issues of in-
struction selection, register allocation, and instruction scheduling are treated
separately, in later chapters.

7.2 ARITHMETIC OPERATORS

Modern processors provide broad support for evaluating expressions. A typ-
ical RISC machine has a full complement of three-address operations,
including arithmetic operators, shifts, and Boolean operators. The three-
address form lets the compiler name the result of any operation and preserve
it for later reuse. It also eliminates the major complication of the two-
address form: destructive operations.

To generate code for a trivial expression, such as a + b, the compiler first
emits code to ensure that the values of a and b are in registers, say ra and rb.
If a is stored in memory at offset @a in the current AR, the compiler might
loadI
@a
⇒ r1
loadAO
rarp, r1
⇒ ra
generate the code sequence shown in the margin to move a into register ra.



■ FIGURE 7.2 Simple Treewalk Code Generator for Expressions.

(Assume that rarp holds the current ARP.) Once a and b are both in registers,
the compiler can emit an add operation to compute their sum.

By contrast, if a’s value already resides in a register, the code can simply
reference its register. If both a and b already reside in registers, say ra and
rb, then the compiler can simply emit the add operation.

As we saw in Section 5.3, the compiler can easily emit simple code for ex-
pressions in a syntax-driven translation framework. If the compiler initially
builds a graphical IR, it can generate a linear form later in compilation us-
ing a simple treewalk, along the lines of the one shown in Fig. 7.2(a). It
relies on several routines, denoted in the algorithm font, to emit code that
instantiates the access method for a name or a number. (For more detail, see
Section 7.3.)

Panel (b) shows a simple AST for a - b × c. Panel (c) shows the code that the
treewalk code generator would produce for that AST. The example assumes
that a, b, and c reside at known fixed offsets from the ARP—at offsets @a,
@b, and @c.



GENERATING LOAD ADDRESS IMMEDIATE
A careful reader might notice that the treewalk code generator in Fig. 7.2
generates a two-operation sequence, loadI followed by loadAO, rather than
a single loadAI operation:

loadI
@a
⇒ r1
loadAO rarp, r1 ⇒ r2
instead of
loadAI rarp, @a ⇒ r2

Throughout the book, the examples assume that it is preferable to generate
this two-operation sequence, rather than the single operation. Two distinct
factors suggest this course.

1. The longer code sequence gives an explicit name to @a. If @a is reused in
other contexts, that name can be reused.
2. The offset @a may not fit in the immediate field of a loadAI. That
determination is best made in the instruction selector.

The compiler can convert the two-operation sequence into one operation
during optimization, if legal and appropriate (e.g., either @a is not reused or it
is cheaper to reload @a). The best course, however, may be to defer this
choice to instruction selection—in effect, isolating the machine-dependent
constant length into a phase of the compiler that is already highly machine
dependent.

The simple treewalk code generator uses one template for all of +, -, ×,
and ÷. It generates code to (1) ensure that the operands are in registers and
(2) perform the operation, leaving the result in a new virtual register.

Most other three-address operations can fit into this framework. Some oper-
ations, such as exponentiation or a trigonometric function, require complex
multioperation sequences for step (2). These may be expanded inline or im-
plemented with a call to a library routine supplied by the compiler or the
operating system.

7.2.1 Function Calls in an Expression

So far, we have assumed that all the operands in an expression are vari-
ables, constants, and temporary values produced by other subexpressions.
Function calls also occur as operands in expressions. To evaluate a function
call, the compiler simply generates the precall sequence needed to invoke
the function, followed by the postreturn sequence, which moves the result
into the appropriate location in the caller. The linkage convention limits the
callee’s impact on the caller.



The presence of a function call may limit the compiler’s ability to reorder
the evaluation of subexpressions. The function may have side effects that
modify the values of variables used in the expression. The compiler must
respect the implied evaluation order of the source expression, at least with
respect to the call. Unless it knows about the call’s possible side effects, the
compiler cannot move references across the call. It must assume the worst
case—that the function both modifies and uses every variable that it can
access. The desire to improve on such worst-case assumptions motivated
the development of interprocedural summary analysis (see Section 9.4).

7.2.2 Mixed-Type Expressions

Most programming languages allow the code to contain an operation that
has operands of different types. These languages carefully define the mean-
ing of such a “mixed-type expression.” (We will focus on source-language
base types rather than programmer-defined types.)

A typical language definition allows some mixed-type expressions, such
The digression on page 248 summarizes the
rules from the C++ standard.
as addition of an integer and a floating-point number, and disallows oth-
ers, such as multiplication by a character string. In the allowed cases, the
compiler may need to insert code that converts one or more of the values
involved in the expression to another type.

The compiler writer has two choices with implicit conversions: make them
For explicit conversions, the IR needs a
way to represent them: appropriate nodes in
a graphical IR or operators in a linear IR.
explicit early in translation and expect optimization to reduce their cost, or
keep them implicit until late in translation to reduce clutter in the IR.

Inserting explicit conversions is simple; as the compiler translates an expres-

+
int
float

int
int
float

float
float
float

Conversion Table for +

sion, it applies the conversion rules of the source language. Most of these
rules can be expressed in an operator-specific table that gives result type as
a function of the operand types. A simple conversion table for + appears in
the margin. The compiler looks up the result type and emits code to convert
operands, as necessary, to the result type. It then emits code to perform the
operation in the result type.

C and C++ provide base types for many widths of integer, each with a
distinct range of numbers that it can represent. Both languages apply an im-
plicit “widening” rule that converts operands to the narrowest type that can
represent both operands. Thus, to add an 8-bit integer and a 64-bit integer,
C converts the 8-bit integer to 64-bit form before performing the addition.

If the language does not allow compile-time determination of types, then
checking and conversion must be done at runtime. The situation may require
the addition of an explicit type field to the runtime representation of the
Runtime type fields are often called tags.
value and a case analysis at runtime to check types, convert operands, and



COMMUTATIVITY, ASSOCIATIVITY, AND NUMBER SYSTEMS
The compiler can often take advantage of the algebraic properties of
operations. Addition, multiplication, and Booleans (and, or, xor) are all
commutative and associative. Thus, the compiler should recognize that for
any given a and b, a + b and b + a compute the same value. Similarly, if the
code contains a + b + c and d + a + b, the compiler should recognize that both
contain the subexpression a + b. If the compiler evaluates expressions in
left-to-right order, it will not see the common subexpression because it will
compute the second expression as (d + a) + b.

When possible, the compiler should use commutativity and associativity to
improve code quality. Reordering expressions can expose additional
opportunities for improvement.

Due to finite precision, floating-point numbers represent a subset of
the real numbers, one that does not preserve associativity. Thus, com-
pilers should not reorder floating-point expressions unless the lan-
guage specifically allows it.

Consider the following example: computing a - b - c, for floating-point a, b,
and c. We can assign values such that:

b, c < a
a - b = a
a - c = a

but a - (b + c) ̸= a. In this case, the result depends on the order of
evaluation. Evaluating (a - b) - c produces a value indistinguishable from a,
while evaluating a - (b + c) produces a value distinct from a.

This problem arises from the approximate nature of floating-point numbers;
the mantissa is small relative to the range of the exponent. To subtract two
numbers, the hardware must normalize them; if the difference in exponents
is larger than the precision of the mantissa, the smaller number will be
truncated to zero. The compiler cannot easily work around this issue, so it
should, in general, avoid reordering floating-point computations.

evaluate the operator. Runtime checking incurs costs every time the code
executes; compile-time checking incurs that cost once.

Assignment as an Expression

The compiler can treat assignment as an operator that has an unusual eval-
Rvalue
an expression evaluated to a value, as on the
right side of an assignment

Lvalue
an expression evaluated to a place, as on the
left side of an assignment

uation method. The expression on the assignment’s right side evaluates to a
concrete value, often called an rvalue. All of the techniques discussed for
expression evaluation produce rvalues. The expression on the left side of
an assignment evaluates to a location, or lvalue, which might be a memory
address or a register. Section 7.3 discusses the computation of lvalues.



loadI
@a
⇒ r1
loadAO
rarp, r1 ⇒ r2
loadI
@b
⇒ r3
loadAO
rarp, r3 ⇒ r4
loadI
@c
⇒ r5
loadAO
rarp, r5 ⇒ r6
mult
r4, r6
⇒ r7
sub
r2, r7
⇒ r8

loadI
@a
⇒ r1
loadAO
rarp, r1 ⇒ r1
loadI
@b
⇒ r2
loadAO
rarp, r2 ⇒ r2
loadI
@c
⇒ r3
loadAO
rarp, r3 ⇒ r3
mult
r2, r3
⇒ r2
sub
r1, r2
⇒ r2

(a) Code from Fig. 7.2(c)
(b) Code After Register Allocation

loadI
@c
⇒ r1
loadAO
rarp, r1 ⇒ r2
loadI
@b
⇒ r3
loadAO
rarp, r3 ⇒ r4
mult
r2, r4
⇒ r5
loadI
@a
⇒ r6
loadAO
rarp, r6 ⇒ r7
sub
r7, r5
⇒ r8

loadI
@c
⇒ r1
loadAO
rarp, r1 ⇒ r1
loadI
@b
⇒ r2
loadAO
rarp, r2 ⇒ r2
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
loadI
@a
⇒ r2
loadAO
rarp, r2 ⇒ r2
sub
r2, r1
⇒ r1

(c) Evaluate b × c First
(d) Code After Register Allocation

■ FIGURE 7.3 Rewriting a - b x c to Reduce Demand for Registers.

To generate code for an assignment, the compiler first emits code to evaluate
Evaluation of the lvalue may require code,
as with an element of an array. In other
cases, such as a scalar value kept in a regis-
ter, it may not require code.

the assignment’s right-hand side to an rvalue. Next, the compiler evaluates
the left-hand side to an lvalue, or location. If the rvalue and lvalue have dif-
ferent types, the language may require the compiler to insert code to convert
the rvalue to the lvalue’s type. Finally, the compiler emits code to move the
rvalue into the specified location.

7.2.3 Reducing Demand for Registers

In general, the compiler can keep unambiguous scalar values in registers
Register pressure
The demand for registers is sometimes
called register pressure.
(see Section 4.7.2). A common code-shape strategy is to assign every value
that can reside in a register to a virtual register and, then, to rely on the
register allocator to decide which values actually reside in physical registers
at each point in the code (see Chapter 13). The compiler can, however, make
code-shape choices that reduce the register pressure in the final code.

Expression evaluation provides a clear example. Consider, again, the evalu-
ation of a - b × c, with all of a, b, and c stored at known offsets from the ARP.
Fig. 7.3 shows two different evaluation orders for the expression, both be-
fore and after register allocation. Panel (a) shows the code from Fig. 7.2(c),
which assumed an unlimited set of virtual registers. Panel (b) shows that



same code after register allocation; it requires three physical registers in ad-
dition to rarp. This result makes sense; the code loads the values of a, b,
and c into registers before it performs the multiply and the subtraction. Ei-
ther a syntax-driven scheme or a left-to-right treewalk would produce this
result.

Changing the evaluation order can lower the register pressure. Panel (c)
shows a version of the code that evaluates the multiply operation first. It
evaluates b × c before it loads a. After register allocation, this version re-
quires one fewer physical register, as shown in panel (d).

The evaluation order in panel (a) corresponds to a left-to-right treewalk.
The evaluation order in panel (c) corresponds to a right-to-left treewalk.
Because multiply has higher precedence than subtraction, the left-to-right
order loads a’s value into a register, but must preserve it while it evaluates
b × c. In this example, the right-to-left order defers the load of a until after
the multiply.

Of course, the best order depends on context. At a binary operation, if the
compiler needs more registers to evaluate one operand than it does for the
other, it should evaluate the more demanding operand first. Doing so will
reduce register pressure by one.

To apply this rule, the compiler must examine the expression twice: the
This observation is not new. Floyd observed
the principle in 1961 [160]. Sethi applied it
to reducing demand for registers a decade
later [321].

first time to compute demand and the second time to choose the order of
subexpression evaluation and emit code. This observation applies in many
optimization and code generation contexts. To obtain good results often re-
quires that the compiler analyze the code before rewriting it.

SECTION REVIEW
Chapter 5 introduced the translation of expressions, along with a framework
to generate either graphical or linear IRs. This section shows how the
compiler can apply the same ideas in a traversal of the IR to generate a
lower-level representation. It also explores some of the complications that
arise in the IR for expressions, such as embedded function calls, type
conversions, and assignment.

Building an IR for an expression and traversing it multiple times allows the
compiler to analyze the code, derive knowledge about it, and adjust the
code in ways that improve the efficiency of the final code. Because a
significant portion of actual running time is spent in expression evaluation,
efficient code for expressions is critical to the overall speed of the generated
program.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
ILOC includes rsubI, an immediate reverse subtract. It can simplify ex-
pression translation. When might it be useful? Why not include the
nonimmediate version, rsub, as well?

2.
Describe two scenarios where multiple traversals of the IR can improve
code quality.

7.3 ACCESS METHODS FOR VALUES

Section 7.2 implicitly assumes that a single access method works for all
identifiers. In practice, different kinds of variables require different access
methods. This section begins with an examination of access methods for
scalar variables. It then describes the complications introduced by the need
to find individual elements within aggregates, such as structures, objects,
and arrays.

7.3.1 Access Methods for Scalar Variables

For scalar variables, the access method must first determine whether the
value resides in a register or in memory. Register access is straightforward;
the code simply uses the virtual register name. Access in memory requires
different strategies depending on the variable’s storage class.

Variables Stored in a Register

If the compiler can keep a variable’s value in a register in the vicinity of
a definition or a use, then it can directly use the register name in opera-
tions that reference the value. Access to register-based values is simple and
immediate.

On most machines, direct access to an enregistered value provides same-
cycle access for both uses and definitions. An operation such as
add r1, r2 ⇒ r1 can both read and write r1 in the same cycle. One goal
of optimization and the primary goal of register allocation is to keep values
in registers in the regions where they are frequently used.

Variables Stored in Memory

A variable may have its primary location in memory for a number of rea-
sons. The name may be ambiguous because the code has multiple names
that might access the same location. The name may have global visibility,
so that its ambiguity (or lack thereof) cannot be determined when compiling



one part of the entire application. The name may have a static lifetime, so
that its value must be preserved across different procedure invocations.

The IR can represent each variable in a lexically scoped language with its
static coordinate: a pair ⟨l,o⟩ where l is the lexical level at which the variable
is defined and o is its offset within the level l data area. Global and static
variables are typically assigned level zero; for them, the compiler must also
record their specific data area.

The general scheme to compute the address of a memory-based variable
is to calculate base + offset, where base is the data area’s virtual address
and offset is the variable’s distance from base. Different levels in the static
coordinate require different strategies to compute base.

Local Variables

For local automatic variables, the compiler can allocate storage in the local
data area, at one end of the procedure’s AR. To reference the variable, the
compiler emits code to add the variable’s known offset to the current ARP,
stored in the designated register rarp.

Unambiguous, local, scalar, automatic variables can live in registers. If de-
mand for registers is high, the register allocator may spill some of these
values to memory for parts of their lifetimes. When it does, the values’ spill
locations are typically placed in the local data area so that the spill and re-
store code can use rarp as a base address.

Local Variables of Surrounding Scopes

For local automatic variables declared in lexically surrounding scopes, the
While the global scope surrounds the other
lexical scopes, access to it uses a different
mechanism.
compiler must emit code to use the addressability mechanism built and
maintained by the linkage convention (see Section 6.4.3).

To find a level l variable using access links, the compiler emits code to find
the level l access link, which serves as a base address. With a global display,
it would load that base address (the ARP of the level l surrounding scope)
directly. It then computes a virtual address as base + offset and uses it in the

load or store operation.

Static and Global Variables

For a variable located in a static data area, the base address is marked with an
With global variables, the compiler might
generate a unique name-mangled label for
each such variable, eliminating the offset
and the addition.

assembly-level label—typically produced by mangling the name associated
with the scope. The compiler obtains the textual label name for the reference
and arranges to load it into a register as a relocatable assembly-level label.



Properties of the ISA will determine how the compiler obtains the runtime
address for the textual label name. We will assume that the label’s value
fits into a load immediate operation. If that is not true, then the compiler
may need to store the label in a static data area (a constant pool) associated
with the procedure and load its value from that location. Of course, the code
needs to locate the constant pool. One scheme is to locate the constant pool
at a known distance from the start or end of the procedure and access it with
a PC-relative address.

For an integer stored at offset 8 in a static data area, the code to compute the
address might be:

loadI
< label > ⇒ ri
// get the base address

addI
ri, 8
⇒ rj
// add the offset

where < label > is the mangled label for the appropriate scope. This sequence
can be followed by a load from rj or a store to rj.

Variables Passed as Parameters

Formal parameters present a conceptual challenge. Consider an integer
function f(x) that takes a single integer parameter, x. Each call site might
pass a different variable, or actual parameter, to x. Those actual parameters
might have several different storage classes. The code to access x inside f
must work independently of the actual parameter’s storage class.

Many linkage conventions designate registers for the first several parame-
Note that call-by-reference parameters
require one more indirection than do call-
by-value parameters.
ters. For call-by-value parameters, the compiler stores the actual value in
the register; the compiler then uses the register name in operations that ref-
erence the formal parameter. For call-by reference parameters, the compiler
stores the actual parameter’s address in the register; it then emits loads and
stores to access the formal parameter’s value.

For parameters passed in memory, the compiler can emit code that uses the
ARP as a base address. Each memory-based parameter has a unique offset
from the ARP; the compiler can emit code to compute the virtual address
of that slot and use that address. Again, for a call-by-value parameter, the
AR slot holds the value, while for a call-by-reference parameter, it holds the
value’s virtual address.

Variables Stored in the Heap

Heap-based variables typically lack both a base address and an offset. The
heap allocation process returns a virtual address, which must be preserved
to retain access to the entity. That virtual address, in turn, must be stored in
either a variable or a field in some other heap-allocated entity.



To access an entity in the heap, the compiler must retrieve the entity’s ad-
Garbage collection relies on the fact that a
heap-allocated entity cannot be accessed if
the running program does not have a copy
of its address.

If the compiled code contains arbitrary
pointer arithmetic or buffer overflows, that
assumption may be false.

dress, using the appropriate access method. Given that address, it can emit
operations to manipulate its memory-based value.

Consider a local automatic variable root that points to a list of heap-
allocated structures, each of which has a next pointer. To generate code
to traverse the list, the compiler generates code to load the value of root.
It uses that value as the address of the start of an instance of the structure.
To move down the list, it adds the offset of next within the structure to the
address of the current list element and loads the address of the next element.

7.3.2 Access Methods for Aggregates

Aggregate objects have more complex access methods than scalar objects
because the compiler must emit code to locate specific elements within the
aggregate. To access an element of a structure, object, or array, the compiler
needs an address for the start of the aggregate object, an offset within the
aggregate, and a type.

Structure Elements

The compiler determines how to find the structure’s start address from a
symbol table lookup using the search path for the context where the ref-
erence occurs. This part of the process is analogous to locating a scalar
variable. The compiler uses the storage class to determine how to find the
start address. It might be an offset from the current ARP or the ARP of a
surrounding scope. It might be an offset from some static or global label.
Alternatively, the start address might be stored in some variable that, itself,
must be located.

Once the compiler has emitted code to ensure that the start address is in a
register, it performs a lookup in the symbol table for the structure’s internal
scope to obtain offset and type information. It emits code to add the start
address to the offset—to create an effective virtual address for the element.
The type information lets the compiler emit the appropriate load operation
or operations.

Object Members

To find a given member of a specific object, the compiler must first locate
the object’s OR. Because the running code uses the OR pointer (ORP) as the
object’s identity, finding the ORP, or start address of the OR, is straightfor-
ward. The source-language reference uses a name; that name contains the
ORP. The compiler ensures that the ORP is in a register using the techniques
described for a scalar variable.



To obtain the member’s type and the offset in the OR, the compiler looks up
the member name in the symbol table for the object’s internal scope. It then
emits code to add the OR address and offset, which creates the member’s
starting address. The type information lets the compiler emit the appropriate
load operation or operations.

Vectors

Programming languages typically specify that vectors are one-dimensional
arrays of contiguous memory, with a specified lower and upper bound on
indices into the vector. A vector V[3:9] has (9 - 3) + 1 elements, as shown in
the margin. To access the ith element of V, the compiler needs the starting
address of V, which we will designate symbolically as @V, V’s lower and
upper bounds, and the offset of element i.

The compiler can compute the offset as (i - low) × w, where low is the de-
clared lower bound of V and w is the length of an element of V. Thus, if low
is 3, i is 6, and w is 4, the offset from @V of the ith element is (6 - 3) × 4 = 12.
If r@V and ri hold the values of @V and i, respectively, then the following code
fragment loads the value of V[i] into rV[i].

subI
ri, 3
⇒ r1
// (i - lower bound)

multI
r1, 4
⇒ r2
// x element length (4)

add
r@V, r2 ⇒ r3
// address of V[i]

load
r3
⇒ rV[i]
// get the value of V[i]

This simple reference introduced three arithmetic operations. The compiler
False zero
The false zero of a vector V is the address
where V[0] would be.

In multiple dimensions, it is the location of
a zero index in each dimension.

can do better. If the lower bound, low, is known, the compiler can fold the
subtraction into @V to create @V0 = @V - low × w, a constant that we will call
the false zero of V.

Many memory references take the form of a base address and an offset.
Thus, most processors support a two-operand load operation similar to
ILOC’s loadAO, or load-address-offset, operation. Using loadAO folds the
addition into the memory operation.

The third arithmetic operation is the multiply. On most processors, an inte-
ger multiply takes multiple cycles. If w is a power of two and the index, i, is
positive, then the compiler can replace the multiply with a left-shift. Taken
together, these would produce the ILOC sequence:

lshiftI
ri, 2
⇒ r2
// i × 4

loadAO
r@V[0], r2 ⇒ rV[i]
// get value of V[i]

This code is shorter and, presumably, faster. A good assembly-language pro-
grammer might write this code.



The compiler writer may want to expose details of the address arithmetic
to more general optimization, such as redundancy elimination or strength
reduction (see Sections 8.4.1 and 10.7.2). Low-level improvements, such as
converting the multiply to a shift and folding the add and the load can be
performed late in compilation.

Strings

Strings are typically stored as a linear sequence of individual elements.
Thus, the address calculation for an element in a string follows the same
form as that for an element of a vector. String formats differ in the way that
they represent the string’s length. While the discussion focuses on character
strings, other types of strings are similar.

An explicit-length representation maintains an integer counter to contain
the number of elements in the string, as shown in the margin. The drawing
shows the length stored at a negative offset from the pointer to the string. To
determine a string’s length, the runtime code simply reads the value in the
length field.

An implicit-length representation uses a designated value to denote the end
of the string. The best known implicit-length string format is C’s null-
terminated character string. As shown in the margin, it stores the null char-
acter, designated as “\0,” as the final character in the string. To determine a
string’s length, the runtime code must walk the string and count characters
up to the null character.

We will defer the implementation of string operations until Section 7.6, after
the section on the implementation of loops and other control-flow opera-
tions.

Multidimensional Arrays

To access an element of a multidimensional array, the compiler also uses
a base address plus offset scheme. In the multidimensional case, the offset
calculation is more complex than for a vector or string. We show the cal-
culation for a two-dimensional array stored in either row-major order or as
a set of indirection vectors (see Section 5.6.3). The schemes generalize to
higher dimensions. The code for column-major order follows a similar logic
and is left as an exercise for the reader.

Row-Major Order. To describe address calculations for multidimensional
arrays, we extend the notation from the vector access method. Consider an
array A dimensioned as A[1:2,1:4]. Let low1 refer to the first dimension’s
lower bound and low2 refer to the second dimension’s lower bound. For A,



low1 = 1, high1 = 2, low2 = 1, and high2 = 4. To simplify the exposition,
let lenk = highk − lowk + 1, the size of dimension k.

To access an element A[i,j], the compiler can emit code that (1) computes
the offset for the start of row i; (2) computes the offset of element j within
that row; and (3) computes the sum of the row offset, the column offset, and
the base address. For A[i,j], that suggests the address computation:

@A + (i − low1) × len2 × w + (j − low2) × w

Here, @A is the base address of A; (i − low1) × len2 is the number of ele-
ments before the start of row i; and (j − low2) is the offset (in elements) of
the jth element of a row. The offsets are multiplied by w, the length in bytes
of an element, to convert them to byte-addresses.

Substituting actual values for i, j, low1, len2, low2, and w, we find that
A[2,3] lies at offset

(2 − 1) × (4 − 1 + 1) × 4 + (3 − 1) × 4 = 24

from A[1,1] (assuming that @A points at A[1,1], at offset 0). Looking at A’s
layout in memory, we find that the address of A[1,1] + 24 is, in fact, the
address of A[2,3].

In the vector case, we were able to simplify the calculation when upper and
lower bounds were known at compile time. Applying the same algebra to
create a false zero in the two-dimensional case produces:

@A +(i × len2 × w) − (low1 × len2 × w) + (j × w) − (low2 × w)

Reordering the terms produces the equation:

@A + (i × len2 × w) + (j × w) − (low1 × len2 × w + low2 × w)

where the last term, (low1 × len2 × w + low2 × w), is independent of i
and j. This term can be factored directly into a false zero for A:

@A0 = @A − (low1 × len2 × w + low2 × w) = @A − 20

Now, the address calculation for A[i,j] is simply



@A0 + i × len2 × w + j × w

Finally, we can refactor and move the w outside, saving a multiply

@A0 + (i × len2 + j) × w

For the address of A[2,3], this evaluates to

@A0 + (2 × 4 + 3) × 4 = @A0 + 44

Since @A0 is just @A − 20, this is equivalent to @A − 20 + 44 = @A + 24, the
same location computed by the original address polynomial.

If we assume that i and j are in ri and rj, and that len2 is a constant, this
refactored polynomial leads to the following code sequence:

loadI
@A0
⇒ r@A0
// adjusted base for A

multI
ri, len2 ⇒ r1
// i × len2
add
r1, rj
⇒ r2
// + j

multI
r2, 4
⇒ r3
// x w

loadAO
r@A0, r3 ⇒ ra
// value of A[i,j]

The computation is now two multiplications and two additions (one in the
loadAO). The second multI can be rewritten as a shift.

If the compiler does not have access to the array bounds, it must either
The compiler could insert the false zero
calculation after the procedure’s prolog
code and rely on dead code elimination to
remove it if it is not needed—for example,
if the only use of the array is as an actual
parameter at a call site.

compute the false zero at runtime or use the full polynomial that includes
the lower bounds. The former option can be profitable if the elements of
the array are accessed multiple times in a procedure; computing the false
zero on entry to the procedure lets the code use the less expensive address
computation. The more complex computation makes sense only if the array
is accessed infrequently.

The ideas behind the address computation for arrays with two dimensions
generalize to arrays of higher dimension. The address polynomial for an
array stored in column-major order can be derived from the same ideas that
underlie the address polynomial for row-major order. The optimizations that
we applied to reduce the cost of address computations apply equally well to
the address polynomials for these other kinds of arrays.

Indirection Vectors. The indirection vector representation is conceptually
simple. Each level of the array uses a set of vectors, as shown in Fig. 7.4.
The innermost level of vectors contains the actual data elements; successive
outer levels contain pointers linked so that a series of vector accesses will
lead to the desired array element.



■ FIGURE 7.4 Indirection Vectors in Row-Major Order for B[1:2,1:3,1:4].

Consider the three-dimensional array B shown in Fig. 7.4. To access
B[i,j,k], the compiler emits code that uses @B0, i, and the length of a pointer
to find the start of the indirection vector for the subarray B[i,*,*]. Next, it
emits code to use that result, along with j and the length of a pointer, to
find the start of the vector for B[i,j,*]. Finally, it uses that result, along
with k and the length w of an element of B to compute the address of
B[i,j,k].

If the values of i,j, and k exist in registers ri,rj, and rk, respectively, and
@B0 is the zero-adjusted address of the first dimension, then the compiler
might generate the following code to load B[i,j,k]:

loadI
@B0
⇒ r@B0
// false zero of B

multI
ri, 4
⇒ r1
// assume pointer is 4 bytes

loadAO
r@B0, r1 ⇒ r2
// get @B[i,*,*]

multI
rj, 4
⇒ r3
// pointer is 4 bytes

loadAO
r2, r3
⇒ r4
// get @B[i,j,*]

multI
rk, 4
⇒ r5
// assume element length is 4

loadAO
r4, r5
⇒ rb
// value of B[i,j,k]

This code assumes that the pointers in the indirection structure have been
adjusted to account for nonzero lower bounds. If not, then the values in
rj and rk must be decremented by the corresponding lower bounds. In the
example, the multiplies can be replaced with shifts.

Using indirection vectors, the reference requires just two operations
per dimension. On machines where memory access was fast relative
to arithmetic—for example, most computers prior to 1985—this access
method was fast. As the cost of memory accesses has increased relative
to the cost of arithmetic, this scheme has lost its advantage in speed.



On cache-based machines, locality is critical to performance. When arrays
grow to be much larger than the cache, storage order affects locality. Row-
major and column-major storage schemes produce good locality for some
array-based operations. The locality properties of an array implemented
with indirection vectors are harder for the compiler to predict and, perhaps,
to optimize.

Arrays of Structure. Some programming languages allow the compiler to
We use the term array of structure to indi-
cate that all of the array elements have the
same structure type.
declare an array of structure—multiple copies of a structure or record with
array-style indexes that locate specific instances (elements in the array of
structure). The access method for an array of structure relies on the address
polynomial for an array to find the start of the structure instance. Within
the instance, the standard structure access method (base + appropriate offset)
applies.

Accessing Array-Valued Parameters

Most languages allow an implementation to pass arrays as call-by-reference
parameters to avoid the need to copy each element’s value at a call. The
caller and callee must agree on the array’s layout and access method—the
form of the address polynomial. The caller must supply the callee with the
values that the access method needs.

Some languages require the programmer to supply the needed values. For
Dope vector
a descriptor for an actual parameter array

Dope vectors may also be used for arrays
whose bounds are determined at runtime.
example, FORTRAN requires that the programmer declare the array using
either constants or other formal parameters to specify its dimensions. Other
languages have the compiler collect, organize, and pass the necessary infor-
mation to the callee. The compiler builds a descriptor, called a dope vector,
that contains both the array’s base address and the necessary information
for each dimension. The dope vector has a known size, so the compiler can
allocate space for it in either the caller’s AR or the callee’s AR. The precall
sequence passes the dope vector’s address in the appropriate parameter slot.

Fig. 7.5 shows an example from PL/I. The procedure main invokes fee twice.
Panels (b) and (c) show the dope vectors for the two call sites. If all the
accesses used the false-zero version of the address polynomial, the dope
vectors would contain the lengths of each dimension of A rather than the
lower and upper bounds.

To access an element of the parameter array, the compiler emits the same
address polynomial that it would use for a reference to a local array, except
that it pulls values for the base address and dimensions from the dope vector.
In this way, activations of the procedure from different call sites can use the
same code to access distinct arrays passed from different call sites. The same
technique can be used to support dynamically sized and allocated arrays. At



■ FIGURE 7.5 Dope Vectors.

allocation time, the compiler can construct a dope vector that subsequent
references use.

Note that access through a dope vector costs more than access to a local
array with known bounds. At best, the dope vector introduces additional
memory references. At worst, it prevents the compiler from using optimiza-
tions that need facts from the array’s declaration.

7.3.3 Range Checks

Most programming languages assume, either explicitly or implicitly, that a
program only accesses locations that are within the defined bounds of data
structures. For example, an array reference cannot access an element that
is outside its lower and upper bounds. Neither can a string reference access
elements that are outside its bounds.

A program that accesses an out-of-bounds element is, by definition, not
Range check
a test that verifies that an access to an ag-
gregate data structure is within its declared
or allocated bounds

well formed. Some languages, such as JAVA and ADA, require that out-of-
bounds accesses be detected and reported. Other languages leave this issue
to the compiler writer’s discretion. Some compilers include code to perform
these range checks; others do not. C’s lack of checking is at least partially
to blame for buffer-overflow attacks—arguably one of the most widespread
computer security problems in history.

The simplest implementation of a range check inserts a test before each
reference to an aggregate entity. The test verifies that the computed index
into the entity falls within its allocated range. The test throws an exception
if the index is outside the valid range.



The example in the margin inserts a test before the array reference in
for i ← 1 to n
for j ← 1 to m

if (lb1 ≤ i ≤ ub1 and
lb2 ≤ j ≤ ub2) then
. . . a[i,j] . . .

else throw exception

Naive Range Checking

if (lb1 ≤ 1 and n ≤ ub1 and
lb2 ≤ 1 and m ≤ ub2)
then

for i ← 1 to n
for j ← 1 to m

. . . a[i,j] . . .

else throw exception

Range Checks After Optimization

the inner loop. It assumes that a has bounds a[lb1:ub1,lb2:ub2]. A naive
range check such as this one can create significant overhead. The additional
control-flow affects both optimization and runtime.

The compiler can often improve naive checks by combining them or proving
that the accesses are safe. In the marginal example, the checks in the inner
loop can be combined and moved out of the two loops. The transformed
code performs one check rather than one check per access.

If the loop nest contains multiple references to A, the impact might be
even greater. With multiple identical references, the compiler can arrange
to check the bounds once. If the loop nest contains multiple references with
different index expressions, the compiler must cover all of them. It may be
able to combine some of those tests algebraically, further reducing the cost.

If the compiler knows the value of some or all of the names used in the
checks, it may be able to move some tests to compile-time. In the example,
the compiler knows that the loop indices, i and j, start at one. If it knows the
value of lb1, it can perform the test lb1 ≤ 1 at compile time and eliminate
it from runtime. The same strategy applies to each check; if the values are
known, move the test to compile time.

To perform range checking, the compiler must know the data structure’s
For a heap-allocated object, the compiler
could use the allocated size to approximate
its total extents. This scheme may over-esti-
mate the declared bounds, but would avoid
references outside its allocated space.

size. If that size is static and known, the compiler can fold it directly into
the check. With a dynamically sized data structure, the runtime system must
record the size information that the range-check code needs.

SECTION REVIEW
The compiler needs a method to find and access each value that a program
computes. The method may be trivial, as for a value kept in a register. It may
require several instructions, as for a scalar value stored in the AR of a
surrounding lexical scope. It may be complex, as for an element of an array
of structures. For each kind of value and each type, the compiler needs a
plan so that it can build the right IR construct for the source reference.

This section described common techniques to access most kinds of
programming language values. A compiler will use a combination of these
techniques, dictated by the implementation of other constructs and by the
definition of the source language, itself. In practice, the translation should
emit code that exposes enough detail to enable later passes in the
optimizer and back end to generate compact and efficient code.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Consider an array A[0:99,0:89,0:109]. Write down the code to com-
pute the address of A[i,j,k] assuming (a) that A is stored in row-major
order and (b) that A is stored using indirection vectors.

2.
Explain, in terms of storage layout and the code required to access a
specific element, the difference between an array of structure and a
structure of arrays.

7.4 BOOLEAN AND RELATIONAL OPERATORS

Programming languages almost always include features to specify control-
Relational expressions typically produce
Boolean values.
flow, such as conditionals and loops. These features, in turn, create the need
for Boolean and relational expressions. The language needs a grammar to
specify these expressions. The compiler writer needs both a representation
for Boolean values and a scheme to translate Boolean operations into the
target machine’s ISA.

The grammatical changes are straightforward, as shown in Fig. 7.6. Rela-
The grammar uses ∨ for or, ∧ for and, and
¬ for not to avoid confusion with ILOC
operations.
tional operators have higher precedence than Boolean operators. The pro-
ductions for RelExpr allow Boolean combinations of relational expressions,
but prevent cascading relational operators, as in a < b < c. The Boolean op-
erators have their traditional precedence: ¬ then ∧ then ∨. A relational
expression produces a Boolean value.

Representing Boolean values is also straightforward. The compiler writer
The programming language may specify
values for true and false, such as 1 and 0
or -1 and 0.
can assign numerical values to true and false. Typical values include zero for
false and nonzero for true. Well chosen values will allow the compiler to use
the target machine’s native operations to manipulate them. Most processors
provide operations to perform negation, and, or, and exclusive or.

The complication in translating Boolean and relational expressions arises
from the different kinds of support provided by processor ISAs. Sec-
tion 7.4.1 introduces a basic scheme for translating these expressions. Sec-
tion 7.4.2 examines how variations in the ISA support for Boolean and
relational operations can affect translation.

7.4.1 Hardware Support for Relational Expressions

Processor ISAs provide several mechanisms to evaluate relational expres-
sions. The operations available on the target ISA largely determine the kinds
of code that the compiler can generate to evaluate a relational expression.
Since relational expressions typically evaluate to a Boolean value, these



Expr
→
Expr ∨ AndTerm

|
AndTerm

AndTerm
→
AndTerm ∧ NotTerm

|
NotTerm

NotTerm
→
¬ RelExpr

|
RelExpr

RelExpr
→
NExpr Rels NExpr

|
NExpr

NExpr
→
NExpr Adds Term

|
Term

Term
→
Term Mults Value

|
Value

Value
→
− Factor

|
Factor

Factor
→
(
Expr )

|
num

|
name

Rels
→
< | ≤ | = | ≥ | > | ̸=

Adds
→
+ | −

Mults
→
× | ÷

■ FIGURE 7.6 Adding Booleans and Relationals to the Expression Grammar.

effects carry over into both the representation and evaluation of Boolean
operations, as well.

Hardware support for relational expressions usually consists of a compari-
if (a < b) then
statement1
else statement2

If-Then-Else Construct

cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ r1
cbr
r1 → L1, L2
L1: statement1
jumpI
→ L3

L2: statement2
jumpI
→ L3

L3: nop

Implementation Scheme

son operation and a set of operations that interpret the result of that com-
parison. While ISAs differ in how they provide this support, most of them
use a similar scheme. Between the comparison operation and the operations
that interpret it, the code must be able to distinguish the six basic relations:
<, ≤, =, ≥, >, and ̸=.

Assume for the moment that, for each of these relations, the ISA includes a
comparison operation that writes a Boolean value in a register as its result.
For example, cmp_EQ ra, rb ⇒ rc sets rc to true if the values in ra and rb
are equal and to false otherwise. To interpret this value, a conditional branch
operation, cbr rc → LT, LF, transfers control to the code at assembly label
LT if rc contains true and to LF otherwise.

The example in the margin shows how the compiler might implement a sim-
ple if–then–else construct using these operations. The code assumes that
the values of a and b reside in ra and rb. The comparison operation, cmp_LT
writes a Boolean value into r1. The conditional branch, cbr, interprets the
value in r1 to choose between labels L1 and L2. After executing the appropri-
ate statement, the code branches to the next statement, at L3.

The compiler can implement Boolean operations, such as ∧, ∨, and ¬, in a

cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ r1
cmp_GT
rc, rd ⇒ r2
and
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
cbr
r3 → L1, L2
L1: statement1
jumpI
→ L3

L2: statement2
jumpI
→ L3

L3: nop

Evaluating (a < b ∧ c > d)

manner similar to the arithmetic operations. Almost all processors provide
direct hardware implementations of these operations, making the translation
straightforward.



If the source construct contained a more complex condition, such as
(a < b ∧ c > d), the implementation could perform two comparison opera-
tions, combine their results with a hardware and operation, and branch on
the result, as shown in the margin at the bottom of the previous page.

Short-Circuit Evaluation

In a Boolean expression, the value of one subexpression may determine the
cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ r1
cmp_LT
rc, rd ⇒ r2
cmp_LT
re, rf ⇒ r3
and
r2, r3 ⇒ r4
or
r1, r4 ⇒ rx

Complete Evaluation of

x ← a < b ∨ c< d ∧ e< f

value of an entire expression. The code in the margin shows the ILOC that
a compiler might emit for the assignment

x ← a < b ∨ c< d ∧ e < f

assuming all six values are in appropriately named registers. The code eval-
uates each of the comparisons, then uses Boolean operations to combine
those results. Assuming that cmp_LT, and, and or take one cycle each, the
code requires five cycles to evaluate the expression.

The compiler relies on two Boolean identities:

∀ x, false ∧ x = false
∀ x,
true
∨ x =
true

To generate the short-circuit code, the compiler must analyze the expression
in light of these two identities and find the set of minimal conditions that
determine its value. In many cases, short-circuit evaluation can reduce the
cost of evaluating Boolean expressions.

The compiler can refactor the code to use the minimal number of compares
cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ rx
cbr
rx → L3, L1
L1: cmp_LT
rc, rd ⇒ rx
cbr
rx → L2, L3
L2: cmp_LT
re, rf ⇒ rx
jumpI
→ L3
L3: nop

Code Refactored for
Short-Circuit Evaluation

needed to determine the expression’s value, as shown in the margin. It first
computes x ← a< b; if x is true, it branches to the next statement in the
source code, at L3. On the other hand, if x is false, the code branches to L1 to
evaluate x ← c< d.

If c< d evaluates to false, then the x is false and the code branches to L3 to
execute the next source-code statement. If c< d is true at this point, then
the result of evaluating e<f determines x’s value; the code jumps to L2 to
perform that final evaluation.

The length of the path through the refactored code depends on the values of
the three comparisons. If a< b, the expression evaluates to true and the code
executes just one cmp_LT and one cbr.

If, instead, a ≥ b, the result relies on the values of c, d, e, and f. If c≥ d, con-
trol jumps to L3 and the evaluation takes two cmp_LTs and two cbrs. Finally,
if c < d, the code uses three cmp_LTs, two cbrs, and a jump. (If the block



for L3 immediately follows the block for L2, the jump should optimize away,
leaving five operations, as in the original code.)

The actual costs will depend on the individual operation costs. On most
machines, an untaken branch is a single cycle; a taken branch might be
more. In many cases, the short-circuited code is faster than the code for the
complete evaluation.

7.4.2 Variations in Hardware Support

Computer architects have introduced many variations in support for eval-
uation of Boolean and relational expressions. The compiler writer must
understand the support that the target ISA provides and should capital-
ize on those features. This section examines three common variations on
the support described in the previous section: conditional move operations,
predicated execution, and condition codes.

Conditional Move Operations

To avoid some of the branches introduced by relational-expression evalu-
ation, some ISAs include a conditional move operation. Conditional move
takes two input values and assigns one of them to its result, based on either
a Boolean value or the condition-code. If the conditional move operation
takes an explicit Boolean argument, it will need to be a “four-address” op-
eration, much like a floating-point multiply-add operation.

A conditional move provides a simple implementation of some if–then–else

if (a < b) then
x ← c + d

else x ← e + f

Conditional Move Example

add
rc, rd
⇒ r1
add
re, rf
⇒ r2
cmp_LT
ra, rb
⇒ r3
c_i2i
r3, r1, r2 ⇒ rx

Corresponding ILOC Code

Using Conditional Move

constructs, as shown in the margin. The compiler can emit code that eval-
uates both additions and only perform the assignment for the selected
case—either the then part or the else part.

If the addition takes fewer cycles than the branch, this strategy saves runtime
cycles. If the hardware can perform multiple adds in a single cycle, a good
instruction scheduler may avoid paying an extra cycle for the add operation
whose result is unused.

Predicated Execution

Predicated execution is another architectural feature intended to avoid the
need for conditional branches. In this scheme, some or all operations can
specify a predicate register that determines whether or not the operation
takes effect. On some architectures, an operation with a false predicate does
not execute; on others, it executes but does not apply its result. (That is,
with a false predicate, an add does not assign its value and a branch does not
transfer control.)



In ILOC, we designate a predicate as a register name enclosed in parentheses
(r1)? add
ra, rb ⇒ rx
and followed by a question mark. The predicated add operation shown in the
margin specifies that rx receives the value (ra + rb) if and only if r1 contains
the value true.

For the example used to demonstrate conditional move, a predicated execu-
cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ r1
not
r1
⇒ r2
(r1)? add
rc, rd ⇒ rx
(r2)? add
re, rf ⇒ rx

ILOC Emitted for Example
Using Predicated Execution

tion scheme emits similar code, as shown in the margin. Again, architects
can implement predication in two ways. The processor might evaluate all
predicated operations and only assign the value if the predicate is true. Al-
ternatively, the processor can test the predicate and only execute operations
guarded by true predicates.

Condition Codes

The discussion, so far, has assumed that the ISA’s comparison operation
comp
ra, rb ⇒ cc1
cbr_LT
cc1 → L1, L2
L1: loadI
true
⇒ r1
jumpI
→ L3
L2: loadI
false ⇒ r1
jumpI
→ L3
L3: nop

Deriving a Boolean Value
from a Condition Code

returns a Boolean value. In practice, many processors return more fine-
grained information, in the form of a condition code. In these ISAs, an
operation such as compare ra, rb sets separate bits in a condition code to
indicate whether a < b, a = b, or a >b. The condition code might be stored
as a separate register; many architectures have stored it in the processor’s
status word. We can think of the condition code as an implicit argument that
some operations define or use.

Condition-code schemes require a conditional-branch operator that can
test specific bits in the condition code. An ISA that uses condition codes
probably has fewer comparison operations and more conditional branch
operations than one with Boolean comparisons; the overall difference in
complexity of the ISA is negligible.

The complexity appears, however, in code that must produce a concrete

if (a < b) then
statement1
else statement2

If-Then-Else Construct

comp
ra, rb ⇒ cc1
cbr_LT
cc1 → L1, L2
L1: loadI
true
⇒ r1
jumpI
→ L3
L2: loadI
false ⇒ r1
jumpI
→ L3
L3: loadI
true
⇒ r2
comp
r1, r2 ⇒ cc2
cbr
cc2 → L4, L5
L4: statement1
jumpI
→ L6
L5: statement2
jumpI
→ L6
L6: nop

Naive Translation

Boolean value from a comparison, as shown in the margin. The compiler
must emit code that uses a branch to interpret the condition code and em-
bed assignments into the true and false paths. The comp operation writes its
results into a condition-code register, cc1; the conditional branch tests that
value for the result “less than.” The branch for < writes the value true into
the result, r1, while the branch for ≥ writes the value false into r1.

Naive translation of relational expressions into an ISA that uses condition
codes can produce awkward code. The code from our earlier if–then–else
example appears in the margin. It evaluates a< b to a Boolean value and
uses that value to select either the then part or the else part. The code is
both awkward and long.

The blocks at L1 and L4 execute if a < b, while the blocks at L2 and L5 execute
if a ≥ b. A human would simplify this code by moving statement1 into the



block at L1 and statement2 into the block at L2. A compiler could achieve
that result with a combination of constant propagation, code motion, and
control-flow simplification (see Chapter 10). The combination of optimiza-
tions moves the two statements, empties blocks L4 and L5, removes those
blocks, and redirects the jumps to L6.

The resulting code, shown in the margin, represents the value of a < b im-
comp
ra, rb ⇒ cc1
cbr_LT
cc1 → L1, L2
L1: statement1
jumpI
→ L6
L2: statement2
jumpI
→ L6
L6: nop

Implicit Representation
for a < b

plicitly as a position in the code. Inside the block at L1, that value is true;
inside the block at L2, it is false. The value is neither useful nor accessible
in L6 or afterward.

The compiler can emit code that represents the comparison’s result implic-
itly. Compilers that target ISAs with condition codes often switch between
explicit and implicit representations for these values. In general, the com-
piler can use an implicit representation unless the source code assigns the
value to a variable. This approach eliminates the bulky and awkward code
that naive translation might produce.

SECTION REVIEW
Processor ISAs implement and interpret comparisons in different ways.
Translation schemes for Boolean and relational values reflect this diversity.
This section showed a basic schema, along with several adaptations for
different kinds of ISA support.

The compiler should make reasoned choices about how to map Boolean
and relational expressions onto the ISA, choosing between implicit and
explicit representations, and making use of features such as conditional
moves and predication. Attention to these details can improve the
efficiency of the generated code.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Chapter 5 showed how to fit an if–then–else construct into a syntax-
driven translation scheme (see page 224). Sketch a syntax-driven trans-
lation scheme to generate code for a relational expression, such as

a < b, using the grammar from Fig. 7.6.

2.
To include short-circuit evaluation into a translation scheme, the com-
piler must choose an order to evaluate an expression’s subterms. How
might the compiler choose an order that reduces the expected time for
evaluation?



7.5 CONTROL-FLOW CONSTRUCTS

Programming languages provide control-flow constructs that allow the pro-
Recall that a basic block is just a maximal-
length sequence of straight-line, unpredi-
cated code.
grammer to connect straight-line sequences of code, or basic blocks, in
useful ways. Common control-flow constructs include an if–then–else
construct, loop constructs, and case statements. For each control-flow con-
struct, the compiler needs a translation scheme.

Section 7.4 described the translation of if–then–else constructs. That
scheme created three labels: one for the block that begins the then part,
another for the block that begins the else part, and a third for the block
that follows the if–then–else construct. The compiler can translate an
if–then–else construct by building a representation for each block and
connecting the blocks as dictated by the translation schemes for the
if–then–else construct. Compilers handle other control-flow constructs in
a similar fashion: building representations for the blocks and connecting
them with labels, branches, and jumps.

To build a basic block, the compiler aggregates the code for consecutive, un-
labeled, unpredicated operations. Any control-flow transfer ends the block.
Any labeled statement ends the block, on the assumption that the label may
be the target of a branch. Any predicated statement ends the block. In ILOC,
every block begins with a labeled statement and ends with a branch or jump.
In an IR that supports fall-through branches, the operation that follows a
branch starts a block. It may lack an initial label.

To tie the blocks together, the compiler inserts code to implement the
if (a < b) then
block1
else block2

If-Then-Else Construct

L0: cmp_LT
ra, rb ⇒ r1
cbr
r1 → L1, L2
L1: block1
jumpI
→ L3
L2: block2
jumpI
→ L3
L3: nop

Implementation Scheme

control-flow specified by the source program. The margin shows a source-
level if–then–else construct, along with ILOC code that follows the discus-
sion in Section 7.4.1. The example abstracts away the details of the blocks
that form the then part and the else part.

The code to implement control-flow constructs resides at or near the end of
the basic blocks. In general, blocks begin with labeled statements and end
with branches or jumps. If the IR models delay slots, the branch or jump
may be earlier in the block. In the ILOC examples that follow, blocks begin
with a label. Since ILOC branches label both the taken and not-taken (or
fall-through) cases, the first operation after a branch is only reachable if it
is labeled. If the IR or the target ISA allow PC-relative branches or jumps,
then a block may begin with an unlabeled statement that is the target of a
PC-relative branch.

While languages use different syntax to express control flow, the set of un-
derlying concepts is small. This section examines the implementation of
conditionals, loops, and case statements.



BRANCH PREDICTION BY USERS
One urban compiler legend concerns branch prediction for if–then–else
constructs. FORTRAN 66 had an arithmetic if statement that took one of
three branches, based on whether the controlling expression evaluated to a
negative number, to zero, or to a positive number. One early compiler
allowed the user to supply a weight for each label that reflected the relative
probability of taking that branch. The compiler then used the weights to
order the branches to minimize the total expected delay.

After the compiler had been in the field for a year, the story goes, one of the
maintainers discovered that the branch weights were being used in the
reverse order, maximizing the expected delay. No one had complained.

This story is usually told as a fable about the value of programmers’ opinions
on the behavior of code they have written. (Of course, no one reported the
improvement, if any, from using the branch weights in the correct order.)

7.5.1 Conditional Execution

The previous example showed a scheme to implement if–then–else con-
structs with a Boolean-valued compare and branches. The discussion in
Section 7.4 focused on evaluating the controlling expression. It showed how
the underlying instruction set influenced the strategies for handling the con-
trolling expression.

Because the then and else parts can contain arbitrary amounts of code,
the compiler writer may employ multiple translation strategies and select
between them based on context. If the then and else parts are large, the
three-block scheme from Section 7.4 works well. If, however, the then and

else parts are small, the compiler should consider the use of either condi-
tional moves or predicated execution to avoid the branches and jumps.

Consider an if–then–else construct where the then and else parts each con-
Predication decreases the density of useful
operations in a block. At some point, the
multicycle delay of a branch is less than the
cost of the cycles spent on useless opera-
tions.

tain 20 operations. With predication, the code would cause the processor to
issue all 40 operations; with a branching strategy, it would issue 20 oper-
ations plus the necessary branches and jumps. For a small enough block,
predication might be faster. As the block size grows, it will reach a point
where the cost of the branches and jumps is less than the cost of issuing
unused operations.

The same issue arises with a strategy based on conditional move operations.
For small blocks, the use of conditional move operations may produce more
efficient code than the three-block strategy.



The choice between strategies based on branches, predication, and condi-
tional move operations should account for several factors.

1. Expected Frequency of Execution If one part of the if–then–else con-
struct executes significantly more often, the compiler should focus on
techniques that improve speed along that path. This bias might take the
form of predicting a branch, of executing some operations speculatively,
or of reordering the logic.
2. Uneven Amounts of Code If one part of the if–then–else construct con-
tains many more operations than the other, this fact may weigh against
the use of predication or conditional moves.
3. Control Flow Inside the Construct
If either part of the if–then–else
construct contains control flow, such as another if–then–else, a case
statement, a loop, or a procedure call, then predication and conditional
move implementations may be a poor choice.

To make the best decision, the compiler must consider all these factors, as
well as the surrounding context. This observation suggests that, in prac-
tice, the compiler may need to (1) build an initial IR that represents the

if–then–else in a more abstract way, (2) analyze the code in that form, and
(3) choose between branches, predication, and conditional move after it has
the context to make a good decision.

7.5.2 Loops and Iteration

Most programming languages include one or more loop constructs to per-
form iteration. The first FORTRAN compiler introduced the do loop to
perform iteration. Today, loops are found in many forms. For the most part,
they have a similar structure.

Consider the C for loop shown in Fig. 7.7(a) as an example. Panel (b) shows
a CFG to illustrate how the compiler might lay out the code for this loop. The
loop has three controlling expressions: e1, which provides for initialization;
e2, which evaluates to a Boolean and governs execution of the loop; and
e3, which executes at the end of each iteration and, potentially, updates the
values used in e2. This basic schema applies to several kinds of loops.

If the loop body consists of a single block—that is, it contains no other con-
trol flow—then the schema produces a loop that has one initial branch plus
one branch per iteration. Some ISAs provide mechanisms to hide branch
latency, such as user-specified predictions or branch delay slots. Compilers
If the ISA allows, the compiler should
predict loop-closing branches as taken.
can often use such features to hide the latency of a loop-closing branch.



■ FIGURE 7.7 General Schema for Layout of a forLoop.

For Loops

To map a for loop into code, the compiler follows the general schema from
Fig. 7.7(b). Consider the following example:

for (i=1; i<=100; i++)
{
loop body
}
next statement

loadI
1
⇒ ri // Step 1

loadI
100
⇒ r1 // Step 2

cmp_GT
ri, r1 ⇒ r2
cbr
r2 → L2, L1

L1: loop body
// Step 3

addI
ri, 1
⇒ ri // Step 4

cmp_LE
ri, r1 ⇒ r3
cbr
r3 → L1, L2

L2: next statement
// Step 5

Translation of steps 1, 2, and 4 is straightforward. It yields a single basic
block for steps 1 and 2, and another block for step 4. Translation of the loop
body proceeds statement-by-statement. If the loop body consists of a single
basic block, then the compiler can combine the blocks for steps 3 and 4,
which may lead to improvements in the code. For example, the instruction
scheduler might use operations from the end of step 3 to fill delay slots in
the branch from step 4.

FORTRAN’s DO Loop

In FORTRAN, the iterative loop is a do loop. It has a more restrictive form
than C’s for loop. The loop header specifies an index variable, an initial



SINGLE TEST VERSUS DOUBLE TEST LOOPS
The loop schema shown in Fig. 7.7 uses a compare-and-branch sequence
both before the loop and at the end of the loop body. An obvious
alternative is to adopt a schema that has a single test at the top of the loop
and a jump at the bottom—avoiding the second compare operation.

The single-test loop creates a two-block loop body for even the simplest
loops. It also lengthens the path through the loop by at least one operation.

The double-test loop should produce a single-block loop body for loops
with no internal control flow. Local optimization and instruction scheduling
then apply to the entire loop body. With constant lower and upper bounds,
the initial check may be eliminated. In short, the double-test loop should
optimize more easily than the single-test one.

value, and a final value. The programmer may specify an optional increment
value. The following example loop iterates the index i from 1 to 100 by
increments of 1.

do 10 i = 1, 100, 1
loop body
10
continue
next statement

loadI
1
⇒ ri // Step 1

loadI
100
⇒ r1 // Step 2

cmp_GT
ri, r1 ⇒ r2
cbr
r2 → L2, L1

L1: loop body
// Step 3

addI
ri, 1
⇒ ri // Step 4

cmp_LE
ri, r1 ⇒ r3
cbr
r3 → L1, L2

L2: next statement
// Step 5

The comments map the ILOC code back to the schema in Fig. 7.7.

FORTRAN, like many languages, has some interesting quirks. One such
peculiarity relates to do loops and their index variables. The number of it-
erations of a loop is fixed before execution enters the loop. If the program
Programmers often pass a loop index at a
call so that it can appear in the code’s out-
put. In FORTRAN, with call-by-reference
parameters, this act can fool the compiler
into believing that the index variable will be
changed by the call.

changes the index variable’s value, or passes it to a subroutine that might
change its value, that change does not affect the number of iterations that
execute. To ensure the correct behavior, the compiler may need to gener-
ate a hidden index variable, called a shadow index variable, to control the
iteration. For an index variable passed at a call, interprocedural summary
analysis can prove that the value is unchanged, allowing the compiler to
eliminate this extra overhead (see Section 9.2.4).



While Loops

A while loop also maps into the standard loop schema. Unlike the C for
loop or the FORTRAN do loop, a while loop has no initialization. Thus, the
code is even more compact.

while (x < y) {
loop body
}
next statement

cmp_GE
rx, ry ⇒ r1
// Step 2

cbr
r1 → L2, L1

L1: loop body
// Step 3

cmp_LT
rx, ry ⇒ r2
// Step 4
cbr
r2 → L1, L2

L2: next statement
// Step 5

Replicating the test in step 4 creates the opportunity for a simple loop to
have a body that consists of a single basic block. The same benefits that
accrue to a for loop from this structure also occur for a while loop.

Until Loops

An until loop iterates until the controlling expression has the value true.
It tests the controlling expression at the end of each iteration of the loop’s
body. PASCAL’s repeat until loop behaves in this way.

An until loop always enters the loop and performs at least one iteration.
The loop has a particularly simple structure, since it avoids steps 1 and 2 in
the schema:

{
loop body
} until (x < y)
next statement

L1: loop body
// Step 3

cmp_LT
rx, ry ⇒ r2
// Step 4

cbr
r2 → L2, L1

L2: next statement
// Step 5

C does not provide an until loop. Its do construct is similar to an until
loop, except that the sense of the condition is reversed. It iterates until the
condition evaluates to false, where an until loop iterates until the condition
is true.

Expressing Iteration as Tail Recursion

In Lisp-like languages, programmers often implement iteration using a styl-
Tail call
A procedure call that occurs as the last
action in some procedure is termed a tail
call. A self-recursive tail call is termed a
tail recursion.

ized form of recursion. If the last action executed by a function is a call, that
call is known as a tail call. For example, to find the last element of a list in

SCHEME, the programmer might write the following simple function:



CONDITION CODES AND COUNTDOWN LOOPS
One argument for condition-code ISAs is that they can produce efficient
code in some specific, but important, situations. In particular, these ISAs
usually have arithmetic operations, such as add and sub, set the condition
code to indicates the relationship between the result value and zero. In this
case, subsequent control-flow operations can sometimes avoid the need to
perform a comparison.

With this feature, the compiler can often translate an iterative loop with
known bounds into a countdown loop that ends when an index variable
reaches zero. (For example, a FORTRAN loop that needs a shadow index
variable can be transformed to count down rather than up.) This
transformation removes one operation from the loop. For loops that contain
few operations, the improvement can be substantial.

(define (last alist)
(cond
((empty? alist) empty)
((empty? (cdr alist)) (car alist))
(else (last (cdr alist)))))

The recursive call in the last line is a tail call.

Compilers can generate particularly efficient code for tail calls that recur on
the caller (see Section 10.4.1). Iteration can be expressed as a tail recursion,
as in the following SCHEME code:

(define (count alist ct)
(cond
((empty? alist) ct)
(else (count (cdr alist) (+ ct 1)))))

(define (len alist)
(count alist 0))

Invoking len on a list returns the list’s length. len relies on count, which
implements a simple counter using tail calls.

Break Statements

Many languages implement a break or exit statement that provides a struc-
tured way to exit a loop. A break transfers control to the first statement
following the loop. For nested loops, a break typically exits the innermost
loop. Some languages, such as ADA and JAVA, allow an optional label on
a break statement that specifies the loop that it will exit. A labeled break



allows the program to exit multiple loops at once. C also uses break in its
switch statement, to transfer control to the statement that follows the switch
statement.

The break statement has a simple implementation. Since loops and case
statements end with a label for the next statement, the compiler can simply
emit an immediate jump to that label. Some languages include a skip or
continue statement that jumps to the next iteration of a loop. This construct
can be implemented as an immediate jump to the code that reevaluates the
controlling expression and tests its value. Alternatively, the compiler can
simply insert a copy of the evaluation, test, and branch at the point where
the skip occurs.

7.5.3 Case Statements

Many programming languages include some form of a case statement. FOR-
TRAN has its computed goto. ALGOL-W introduced the case statement in
its modern form. BCPL and C have a switch construct. PL/I generalized the
switch statement; one version allowed logical expressions as case labels.
As the introduction to this chapter hinted, implementing a case statement
efficiently is complex.

Consider the implementation of C’s switch statement. The basic strategy is
simple: (1) evaluate the controlling expression; (2) branch to the selected
case; and (3) execute the code for that case. Steps 1 and 3 are well under-
stood; they follow from earlier discussions.

In C, the individual cases usually end with a break statement that exits the
switch statement. If a case ends without a break, control falls through to the
next case. To make this feature work, the compiler must either (1) preserve
the original order of the cases, (2) add an explicit jump at the end of any
case that lacks a break, or (3) clone the code for the fall-through case.

To make the case-statement implementation efficient, the compiler must
choose a good method to find the desired case. The choice of case is not
known until runtime and may, at runtime, change with each execution of the
case statement. Thus, the compiler must emit code that will use the value
of the controlling expression to locate the corresponding case. No single
scheme works well for all instances. Many compilers have the ability to
generate several different schemes and choose a specific scheme based on
context.

This section examines three common strategies: a linear search, a computed
address, and a binary search. Each strategy is appropriate under different
circumstances.



switch (e1) {

case 0:
block0;
break;

case 1:
block1;
break;

case 3:
block3;
break;

default: blockd;
break;
}

t1 ← e1

if (t1 = 0)
then block0
else if (t1 = 1)
then block1
else if (t1 = 3)
then block3
else blockd

(a) Switch Statement
(b) Implementation with Linear Search

■ FIGURE 7.8 Case Statement Implemented with Linear Search.

Linear Search

The simplest way to locate the appropriate case is to treat the case state-
ment as the specification for a nested set of if–then–else statements. For
example, the switch statement shown in Fig. 7.8(a) can be translated into the
pseudocode shown in panel (b). This scheme preserves the meaning of the
switch statement, but makes the cost of reaching individual cases dependent
on the order in which they appear.

With a linear search strategy, the compiler should attempt to order the cases
by estimated execution frequency. Still, when the number of cases is small—
say three or four—this strategy can be efficient.

Direct Address Computation

If the case labels form a compact set, the compiler can do better than linear
Jump table
a vector of labels used to transfer control
based on a computed index into the table
search. Consider the switch statement shown in Fig. 7.9(a). It has case labels
from 0 to 9, plus a default case. In this case, the compiler can build a vector,
or jump table, that contains the block labels, and find the desired label by
indexing into the table. The jump table is shown in panel (b), while the code
to compute the correct case’s label is shown in panel (c). The search code
assumes that the jump table begins at @T and that a label occupies @LL bytes.

For a dense label set, this scheme generates compact and efficient code. The
cost is small and constant—a brief calculation, a memory reference, and a
jump. If a few holes exist in the label set, the compiler can fill those slots
with the label for the default case. If no default case exists, the appropriate
action depends on the language. In C, for example, the code should branch
to the first statement after the switch, so the compiler can place that label in
each hole in the table. If the language treats a missing case as an error, the



switch (e1)
{

case 0:
block0
break;

case 1:
block1
break;

case 2:
block2
break;
···
case 9:
block9
break;

default: blockd
break;
}

@T:
LB0
LB1
LB2
LB3
LB4
LB5
LB6
LB7
LB8
LB9

t1 ← e1

if (0 > t1 or t1 > 9)
then jump to LBd
else
t2 ← @T + t1 × @LL
t3 ← memory(t2)
jump to t3

(a) Switch Statement
(b) Jump Table
(c) Address Computation

■ FIGURE 7.9 Case Statement Implemented with Direct Address Computation.

compiler can fill holes in the jump table with the label of a block that throws
a runtime error.

Binary Search

As the number of cases rises, linear search becomes inefficient. Similarly,
as the label set becomes more sparse, jump table size becomes a problem
for direct address computation. The classic solutions from efficient search
apply here. If the compiler can impose an order on the case labels, it can use
binary search to obtain a logarithmic search rather than a linear one.

The idea is simple. The compiler builds a compact ordered table of case
labels, along with their corresponding block-address labels. It emits a binary
search to find the case label or its absence. Finally, it either branches to the
corresponding label or to the default case.

Fig. 7.10(a) shows a case statement with a sparse set of labels (0, 15, 23, 37,
The exact form of the search loop might
vary. For example, the code in panel (c)
does not short circuit the case when it finds
the label early. Empirical testing may be
necessary to find the best choices.

41, 50, 68, 72, 83, and 99) and a default case. The labels could, of course,
cover a much larger range. Panel (b) shows the corresponding search table,
and panel (c) shows a binary search that the compiler might emit to locate
the desired case and branch to it.

To aid in subsequent analysis, the compiler should record the set of jump
targets in the IR (such as ILOC’s tbl pseudooperation described in Ap-
pendix A.5). Otherwise, the labels appear as data rather than code and passes
that analyze control flow, such as the CFG construction, may have difficulty
finding them (see Section 4.6).



switch (e1)
{

case 0:
block0
break;

case 15: block15
break;

case 23: block23
break;

...

case 99: block99
break;

default: blockd
break;
}

Value
Label

0
LB0

15
LB15

23
LB23

37
LB37

41
LB41

50
LB50

68
LB68

72
LB72

83
LB83

99
LB99

t1 ← e1

down ← 0 // lower bound
up ← 10
// upper bound + 1

while (down + 1 < up)
{
middle ← (up + down) ÷ 2
if (Value[middle] ≤ t1)
then down ← middle
else up ← middle
}

if (Value [down] = t1
then jump to Label[down]
else jump to LBd

(a) Switch Statement
(b) Search Table
(c) Code for Binary Search

■ FIGURE 7.10 Case Statement Implemented with Binary Search.

SECTION REVIEW
Programming languages include many features that implement control
flow. The compiler needs a schema for each such construct in the source
language. In some cases, such as a loop, one approach serves for multiple
different constructs. In others, such as an if-then-else or a case statement,
the compiler must choose between several implementation schemes.

To make the best choice in these more complex cases, the compiler writer
may choose to build a more abstract initial IR and analyze that IR to
determine the specific facts that the compiler needs to make an informed
decision. Then, with those facts in hand, it can rewrite the construct to
implement the chosen scheme.

do 10 i = 1, 100
loop body

i = i + 2
10
continue

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Write ILOC code for the FORTRAN loop shown in the margin. Recall that
the loop body must execute 100 iterations, even though the loop mod-
ifies the value of i.

2.
Many programming languages include an unconditional jump, such as
the goto statement in C. How might the compiler manage the label for
such a jump in a syntax-driven translation scheme?



7.6 OPERATIONS ON STRINGS

Strings arise in multiple contexts. The most common strings contain char-
FORTRAN 66 lacked support for character
strings, a major omission.
acters, as found in most languages since COBOL. Some languages support
strings with different element types. Basic string operations, however, have
a common structure across many element types.

Support for string operations varies from that in C, where most manipula-
tion takes the form of calls to library routines, to that in PL/I, where the
language provides direct mechanisms to assign whole strings, substrings,
and individual characters, and to concatenate strings to form new strings.
To illustrate the translation issues that strings introduce, this section dis-
cusses string-length computation, string assignment, and string concatena-
tion. Other string operations, such as substitution through a translation table,
follow the same basic ideas.

String operations can be costly. Older CISC architectures, such as the IBM
S/370 and the DEC VAX-11, provide extensive hardware support for char-
acter string manipulation. RISC machines rely more heavily on the compiler
to code these complex operations using a set of simpler operations. The ba-
sic operation, copying bytes from one location to another, arises in many
different contexts.

7.6.1 String Length

Programs that manipulate strings often need to know the length of a string.
The implementation of a length operation depends on the underlying repre-
sentation (see Section 5.6.3). For a string with an explicit length field, the
compiler can simply emit code to access the length at a fixed offset from the
start of the string (usually, a negative offset).

For a null-terminated string, the running program must walk the string and
len ← 0

while (string[len] ̸= ’\0’)
len ← len + 1

Finding the Length of a
Null-Terminated String

count the elements, as shown in the margin. The pseudocode leaves the num-
ber of string elements in the variable len.

The length computation illustrates the tradeoff between the two represen-
tations. The explicit-length version uses more space and makes length an
O(1) operation. The null-terminated version may use less space; it makes
length an O(string length) operation.

7.6.2 String Assignment

String assignment breaks into two distinct cases: single-character assign-
ment and multicharacter assignment. Single character assignment can be
straightforward. In C, an assignment from the third character of b to the



second character of a can be written as a[1] = b[2];. (Recall that C defaults
cloadAI
r@b, 2 ⇒ r2
cstoreAI
r2
⇒ r@a,1

Code for a[1] = b[2];

to zero as the lower bound in a vector or string.) In an ISA with one-byte
characters and byte-oriented memory operations (cload and cstore), this as-
signment might translate into the simple code shown in the margin. Assume
that r@a and r@b hold the base addresses of a and b.

Without hardware-supported, byte-length, memory operations, the code be-

The compiler can emit code that uses
Boolean operations with appropriate masks
to clear bytes or to move a byte from one
word to another.

comes more complex. The compiler must emit code to load the word that
contains b[2]. The code must use a mask to clear the rest of the word and
then shift the character from b[2] into the position for a[1]. It must load the
word that contains a[1] and clear that byte (another and of an appropriate
mask), and move the character from b[2] into that position (with an or oper-
ation). Finally, it must write the word that holds a[1] back to memory. The
complexity of this operation may explain why byte-length loads and stores
are common.

For multicharacter assignments, whether an entire string or a subrange, the
la ← size_of(a)
lb ← length(b)

if (la < lb)
then throw an error

i ← 0

while (i < lb) do
a[i] ← b[i]
i ← i + 1

Whole String Assignment

compiler can wrap a loop around the code for a single-character assignment.
With byte-length operations, the code is simple. The loop in the margin
assigns all of b to a. It assumes that both strings have zero as a lower bound
and that size_of(a) returns a’s allocated length—that is, its capacity. To
assign a subrange, the upper and lower bounds change on both strings.

If the ISA lacks byte-oriented operations, multicharacter assignment can
create complex situations. In the best case, the source and destination have
the same memory alignment. In the worst case, the code must mask and shift
each character to build the words in the destination string. These examples
only arise in an ISA without byte-oriented memory operations and are left
as an exercise for the reader.

To achieve efficient execution for long word-aligned strings, the compiler
can generate code that uses whole-word loads and stores. Conceptually,
the compiler wants to generate byte-oriented operations until it reaches a
word or double-word alignment boundary, then use word or double-word
operations as long as possible, and handle any remaining characters with
byte-oriented operations. The effect is similar to unrolling the loop (see
Section 8.5.2) and combining the operations, with a preloop to reach the
alignment boundary and a postloop to handle any trailing characters.

As with single-character assignment, the code becomes more complex if
the ISA lacks byte-oriented memory operations. In practice, the compiler’s
runtime library might include carefully optimized routines to implement the
nontrivial cases (e.g., POSIX memmove).



7.6.3 String Concatenation

Concatenation is simply a shorthand for a sequence of one or more assign-
ments. It comes in two basic forms: appending string b to string a, and
creating a new string that contains a followed immediately by b.

The former case requires a length computation followed by an assignment.
If sufficient space is not available, the code
should raise a runtime exception or signal
an error.
The emitted code determines the length of a and then, if space permits, it
copies the characters from b into the space that immediately follows the con-
tents of a. The latter case copies each character in a and each character in b.
The compiler, in essence, treats the concatenation as a pair of assignments.

In either case, the compiler should ensure that enough space is allocated
to hold the result. In practice, either the compiler or the runtime system
must know the allocated length of each string. If the compiler knows those
lengths, it can perform the check during code generation and avoid the run-
time check. In cases where the compiler cannot know the lengths of a and b,
it must generate code to compute the lengths at runtime and to perform the
appropriate test and branch.

7.6.4 Optimization of String Operations

Because string operations often require O(string length) time, compiler
writers should try to optimize them. A classic example of a string optimiza-
tion problem is to find the length that would result from the concatenation
of two strings, a and b. If + is the concatenation operator, we might write
this expression as length(a + b).

The expression length(a + b) has two obvious implementations: (1) con-
struct a + b and compute its length (in C, strlen(strcat(a,b))), and (2) add
the lengths of a and b (in C, strlen(a) + strlen(b)). The latter solution, of
course, is desired, as it avoids creating a temporary string just to compute
the length.

As discussed in Section 7.3.3, string operations may include a range check
to avoid reading or writing characters outside of the string’s allocated extent.
Range checks can prevent logical errors from corrupting other data; they can
also prevent malicious code from either reading or corrupting runtime state.
The string assignment example shown earlier carefully placed the range
check outside the loop.

Range checks, of course, require basic information about string length. To
check a write, the test will need to know the allocated size of the string.
To check a read, it may also need to know the current size of the string.
(Consider a string allocated to have 1,024 bytes that currently holds the



characters "hello world!". An attempt to read the 128th character should
trip a range check.) The same kinds of range-check optimizations that apply
to arrays also apply to strings.

SECTION REVIEW
In principle, string operations are similar to vector operations. The details of
string representation and the complications introduced by alignment and
efficiency can complicate the code that the compiler must generate. Simple
loops that copy one character at a time are easy to generate, to understand,
and to prove correct. More complex loops that use word or double-word
operations can be more efficient; the cost of that efficiency is added code to
handle the corner cases. Many compilers handle the complex cases with a
call to a string-copy routine in the runtime system.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Write ILOC code for the string assignment a ← b using word-length
loads and stores. (Use character-length loads and stores in a postloop
to clean up the end cases.) Assume that a and b are word aligned and
nonoverlapping.

2.
If the two strings in question 1 are character aligned, what complica-
tions arise? Similarly, what complications arise if they may overlap?

7.7 PROCEDURE CALLS

The implementation of procedure calls is, for the most part, straightforward.
As shown in Fig. 7.11, and discussed in Section 6.5, a call consists of four
distinct sequences: the precall and postreturn sequences in the caller, and
the prolog and epilog in the callee. A single procedure can contain multi-
ple call sites, each with its own precall and postreturn sequences. In most
In languages that allow multiple entry
points, such as PL/I, each entry point has its
own prolog.
languages, a procedure has one entry point, so it has one prolog sequence
and one epilog sequence. Many of the details involved in these sequences
are described in Section 6.5. This section focuses on issues that affect the
compiler’s ability to generate efficient, compact, and consistent code for
procedure calls.

As a general rule, moving operations from the precall and postreturn se-
quences into the prolog and epilog sequences should reduce the overall size
of the final code. If the call from p to q shown in Fig. 7.11 is the only call to
q in the entire program, then moving an operation from the precall sequence



■ FIGURE 7.11 A Standard Procedure Linkage.

in p to the prolog in q (or from the postreturn sequence in p to the epilog
in q) has no impact on code size. If, however, other sites call q, then moving
an operation from the caller to the callee (at all the call sites), it should re-
duce the overall code size by replacing multiple copies of an operation with
a single one. As the number of call sites that invoke a given procedure rises,
the savings grow. In general, this kind of linkage optimization can only be
For example, a static function in C can
only be invoked by procedures defined in
the same file.

If the function’s address is never taken, the
compiler can customize its linkage.

done during the design of the linkage convention, or in circumstances where
the compiler knows and compiles each of the callers.

We assume that most user-written procedures are called from several loca-
tions; if not, both the programmer and the compiler should consider moving
the procedure inline at the point of its only call.

Procedure calls in Algol-like and object-oriented languages are similar. The
primary difference between calls in ALLs and OOLs lies in the technique
used to locate the code for the callee (see Section 6.3). In addition, a call in
an object-oriented language typically includes the receiver’s object record
as an implicit parameter.

7.7.1 Evaluating Actual Parameters

When the compiler builds the precall sequence, it must emit code to evaluate
the actual parameters to the call. The compiler treats each actual parameter
as an expression. For a call-by-value parameter, the precall sequence eval-
uates the expression and stores its value in a location designated for that
parameter—either in a register or in the callee’s AR. For a call-by-reference
parameter, the precall sequence evaluates the parameter to an address and
stores the address in a location designated for that parameter. If a call-by-
reference parameter has no storage location, then the compiler may need to



allocate space in the caller’s AR to hold the parameter’s value so that it has
an address to pass to the callee.

If the source language specifies an evaluation order for actual parameters,
the compiler must implement that order. Otherwise, it should use a consis-
tent order—either left to right or right to left. The evaluation order matters
for parameters that might have side effects. For example, a program that
used push and pop to manipulate a stack would produce different results for
subtract(pop(), pop()) under left-to-right and right-to-left evaluation.

Procedures typically have several implicit arguments, such as the proce-
dure’s ARP, the caller’s ARP, the return address, and any information
needed to establish addressability. Object-oriented languages pass the re-
ceiver as an implicit parameter. Some of these arguments are passed in
registers while others usually reside in memory. Many architectures have
an operation like

jsr label1

that transfers control to label1 and places the address of the operation that
follows the jsr into a designated register.

Procedures passed as actual parameters may require special treatment. If
p calls q, passing procedure r as an argument, p must pass to q more in-
formation than r’s starting address. In particular, if the compiled code uses
access links to find nonlocal variables, the callee needs r’s lexical level so
that a subsequent call to r can find the correct access link for r’s level. The
compiler can construct an ⟨address,level⟩ pair and pass it (or its address) in
place of the procedure-valued parameter. When the compiler constructs the
precall sequence for a procedure-valued parameter, it must emit the extra
code to fetch the lexical level and adjust the access link accordingly.

7.7.2 Saving and Restoring Registers

Under any calling convention, one or both of the caller and the callee must
preserve register values. Often, linkage conventions use a combination of
caller-saves and callee-saves registers. As both the cost of memory opera-
tions and the number of registers have risen, the cost of saving and restoring
registers at call sites has increased, to the point where it merits careful
attention.

In choosing a strategy to save and restore registers, the compiler writer must
consider both efficiency and code size. Some processor features impact this
choice. Features that spill a portion of the register set can reduce code
size. Examples of such features include register windows on the SPARC



machines, the multiword load and store operations on the Power architec-
tures, and the high-level call operation on the DEC VAX-11. Each of these
features offers the compiler a compact way to save and restore some portion
of the register set.

While larger register sets can increase the number of registers that the code
saves and restores, in general, using these additional registers improves the
speed of the resulting code. With fewer registers, the compiler would be
forced to generate loads and stores throughout the code; with more registers,
many of these spills occur only at a call site. (The larger register set should
reduce the total number of spills in the code.) The concentration of saves and
restores at call sites presents the compiler with opportunities to handle them
in better ways than it might if they were spread across an entire procedure.

■
Using Multiregister Memory Operations When saving and restoring ad-
jacent registers, the compiler can use a multiregister memory operation.
Many ISAs support doubleword and quadword load and store opera-
tions. Using these operations can reduce code size; it may also improve
execution speed.

■
Using a Library Routine As the number of registers grows, so do the
precall and postreturn sequences. The compiler may benefit from using
custom save and restore routines with simplified call sequences. Across
all calls, this strategy could produce a significant code-size savings.

The save and restore routines can take an argument that specifies which
registers must be preserved. It may be worthwhile to generate optimized
versions for common cases, such as preserving all the caller-saves or
callee-saves registers.

■
Combining Responsibilities To reduce overhead further, the compiler
might have the precall sequence pass the callee a value that specifies
which caller-saves registers to preserve. The callee can then invoke the
compiler’s save routine to preserve both the caller and callee save regis-
ters in a single call. The epilog sequence can pass the same specification
to the restore routine to reload the saved registers. This approach limits
the overhead to a single call to save and another to restore. It separates
responsibility (caller saves versus callee saves) from the cost to call the
routine.

The compiler writer should pay close attention to the differences in code
size and runtime speed among these distinct approaches. The code should
use the fastest operations for saves and restores. This requires a close look at
the costs of single-register and multiregister operations on the target archi-
tecture. Using library routines to perform saves and restores can save space;
careful implementation of those library routines may mitigate the added cost
of invoking them.



SECTION REVIEW
The code for a procedure call is split between the caller and the callee, and
among the prolog, epilog, precall, and postreturn sequences. These
sequences cooperate to implement the linkage convention, as discussed in
Chapter 6. Language rules and parameter binding rules dictate both the
order and the manner of evaluation for actual parameters. System-wide
conventions determine responsibility for saving and restoring registers.

Compiler writers pay particular attention to the implementation of
procedure calls because the optimization opportunities are difficult for
general techniques to discover (see Chapters 8 and 10). The many-to-one
nature of the caller-callee relationship complicates analysis and
transformation, as does the distributed nature of the cooperating code
sequences. Equally important, minor deviations from the defined
conventions can cause incompatibilities in code from different compilers.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
When a procedure saves registers, either callee-saves registers in its
prolog or caller-saves registers in a precall sequence, where do the val-
ues in those registers go? How much space should the compiler reserve
to hold them?

2.
In some situations, the compiler must create a storage location to hold
the value of a call-by-reference parameter. What kinds of parameters
may not have their own storage locations? What actions might be re-
quired in the precall and postreturn sequences to handle these actual
parameters correctly?

7.8 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

One of the more subtle tasks that confronts the compiler writer is select-
ing a scheme to implement each source-language construct. Almost any
source language construct can be implemented in multiple ways. The spe-
cific choices that the compiler writer makes at design time have a strong
impact on the code that the compiler generates.

In a compiler that is not intended for production use—where the perfor-
mance of the compiled code is less important—the compiler writer might
select easy to implement translations that produce simple code. If the cus-
tomers expect performance, as with an optimizing compiler, the compiler
writer should focus on translations that expose as much information as pos-
sible to the later phases of the compiler—low-level optimization, instruction



scheduling, and register allocation. These two different perspectives lead
to different shapes for loops, to different disciplines for naming temporary
variables, and, possibly, to different evaluation orders for expressions.

The classic example of this distinction is the case statement. In a debug-
ging compiler, the implementation as a cascaded series of if–then–else
constructs is fine. In an optimizing compiler, the inefficiency of the myriad
tests and branches makes a more complex implementation scheme worth-
while. The effort to improve the case statement must be made when the IR
is generated; few, if any, optimizers will convert a cascaded series of condi-
tionals into a binary search or a direct jump table.

CHAPTER NOTES

The material contained in this chapter falls, roughly, into two categories:
generating code for expressions and handling control-flow constructs. Ex-
pression evaluation is well explored in the literature. Discussions of how
to handle control flow are more rare; much of the material on control flow
in this chapter derives from folklore, experience, and careful reading of the
output of compilers.

Floyd presented the first multipass algorithm for generating code from ex-
pression trees [160]. He points out that both redundancy elimination and
algebraic reassociation have the potential to improve the results of his algo-
rithm. Sethi and Ullman [321] proposed a two-pass algorithm that is optimal
for a simple machine model; Proebsting and Fischer extended this work to
account for small memory latencies [299]. Aho and Johnson [6] introduced
dynamic programming to find least-cost implementations.

The predominance of array calculations in scientific programs led to work
on array-address expressions and to optimizations (like strength reduction,
Section 10.7.2) that improve them. The algebraic transformations used to
simplify the address polynomial for multidimensional arrays follow Scar-
borough and Kolsky [317]. Dope vectors appeared in ALGOL-60 systems;
Sattley describes their use to handle dynamically allocated arrays [316].

Harrison used string manipulation as a motivating example for discussing
pervasive inline substitution and specialization [192]. The example with
length(a+b) in Section 7.6.4 comes from that paper.

Mueller and Whalley describe the impact of different loop shapes on per-
formance [280]. Bernstein provides a detailed discussion of the options that
arise in generating code for case statements [43]. The best descriptions of
linkage conventions and their implementations appear in processor-specific
and operating-system-specific manuals.


Exercises
375

EXERCISES

1.
Extend the pseudocode for the treewalk code generator in Fig. 7.2 to
Section 7.2
insert type conversions for ×, ÷, +, and -. Assume that type(node) returns
an enumerated value from the set

{ Short, Int, Float, Double }

and that the conversions are specified by the table:

Short
Int
Float
Double

Short
Short
Int
Float
Double

Int
Int
Int
Float
Double

Float
Float
Float
Float
Double

Double
Double
Double
Double
Double

2.
For each of the trees below, show the ILOC code that the treewalk code-
generation algorithm from Fig. 7.2 would emit. Assume an unlimited
set of virtual registers.

3.
For trees (a) and (b) above, show ILOC code that a translator might emit
if it tried to minimize register use. For each interior node, indicate which
of its children should be evaluated first.

4.
Implementation concerns often mean that textually identical references
Section 7.3
in the source program have different runtime costs. Compare and con-
trast the cost of reading the value of a local scalar variable x when:

a.
x is unambiguous

b.
x is ambiguous

c.
x is a call-by-value parameter of the current procedure

d.
x is a call-by-reference parameter of the current procedure

e.
x is static



5.
For a character array A[10:12,1:3] stored in row-major order, show

ILOC code to calculate the address of A[i,j]. Assume that A begins
at @A. Use as few ILOC operations as you can.

6.
Consider an integer array A[1:7,2:9] stored in column-major order (as
in FORTRAN). Assume that A begins at @A.

Derive the formula to compute the address of A[i,j] and write down
ILOC code for the calculation.

7.
For the assignment x ← a > b ∧ b > c:
Section 7.4

a.
Write ILOC to evaluate the statement using the ILOC comparison
and conditional branch syntax (see page 763).

b.
Write ILOC to evaluate the statement using predicated operations,
as shown in Section 7.4.

8.
Consider a simple if–then–else construct:

if (x < y) then
block1;

else block2;

What properties of block1 and block2 should the compiler consider in
choosing between an implementation with (a) a comparison and a con-
ditional branch, (b) predicated execution, and (c) a conditional move?
How does branch latency affect the decision?

9.
You recently implemented, by hand, a scanner. The scanner spends most
Section 7.5
of its time in a single while loop that contains a large case statement.

a.
How would the different case statement implementation techniques
affect the efficiency of your scanner?

b.
How would you change your source code to improve the run-
time performance under each of the case statement implementation
strategies?

10.
Convert the following C tail-recursive function to a loop:

List * last(List *l) {
if (l == NULL)
return NULL;
else if (l->next == NULL)
return l;
else
return last(l->next); }

Show the C code for the loop.


Exercises
377

do {

*a++ = *b++;

} while (*b!=‘\0’)

loadI
@b
⇒ r@b
loadI
@a
⇒ r@a
loadI
NULL
⇒ r1
L1: cload
r@b
⇒ r2
cstore r2
⇒ r@a
addI
r@b, 1 ⇒ r@b
addI
r@a, 1 ⇒ r@a
cmp_NE r1, r2 ⇒ r4
cbr
r4
→ L1, L2
L2: nop
// next statement

(a) Original Code
(b) Generated ILOC

■ FIGURE 7.12 Example for Exercise 11.

11.
Consider the character copying loop shown in Fig. 7.12. Modify the
Section 7.6

ILOC code so that it branches to an error handler at Lsov on any attempt
to overrun the allocated length of a. Assume that the allocated length of

a is stored as an unsigned four-byte integer at an offset of –8 from the
start of a.

12.
String assignment on overlapping strings can become complex.

a.
Write the pseudocode for a function shuffle(a,s,l,o) that copies

l characters starting at a[s] to a[s+o].
Note that o can be positive or negative.

b.
How would you range check the assignment in shuffle? Assume
that length(a) returns the number of characters stored in a and

size_of(a) returns the allocated size of a.

13.
Consider an unambiguous, local, integer variable x. A call site in the
Section 7.7
procedure that declares x passes it as a call-by-reference actual param-
eter. The compiler can keep x in a register except at the call site. Inside
the callee, x must have a memory address.

a.
Where should the compiler store x?

b.
How should the compiler handle x at the call site?

c.
How would your answers change if x was passed as a call-by-value
parameter?

14.
The linkage convention is a contract between the compiled code for a
procedure and its callers. It creates a known interface that callers can use
to safely invoke the procedure. Thus, the compiler should only violate



the linkage convention when such a violation cannot be detected from
outside the compiled code.

a.
Under what circumstances can the compiler safely choose to im-
plement a variant (e.g., nonstandard) linkage? Give examples from
real programming languages.

b.
What changes might make the calling sequence more efficient and
what facts would the compiler need to make those changes?




