Chapter8

Introduction to Optimization

ABSTRACT
To improve the quality of code that a compiler generates, its optimizer an-
alyzes that code and rewrites it into a more efficient form. This chapter
introduces the problems and techniques of code optimization and presents
key concepts through a series of example optimizations. Chapter 9 expands
on this material with a deeper exploration of program analysis. Chapter 10
provides a broader coverage of optimizing transformations.

This chapter examines how optimization can improve code. It discusses the
safety and profitability of optimizations, along with the kinds of opportu-
nities for improvement that a compiler writer should seek. It lays out the
various scopes at which optimization is performed and presents two exam-
ples at each scope.

KEYWORDS
Optimization, Safety, Profitability, Scope of Optimization, Analysis, Trans-
formation

8.1 INTRODUCTION

The compiler’s front end translates the source-code program into some in-
termediate representation (IR). The back end translates the IR program into
a form where it can execute directly on the target machine, either a hard-
ware platform such as a commodity microprocessor or a virtual machine as
in JAVA. Between these processes sits the compiler’s middle section, its op-
timizer. The optimizer’s task is to transform the IR program from the front
end in a way that will improve the quality of the code that the back end
produces. Our focus is on scalar optimization—that is, the optimization of
single-threaded computations. Optimization of parallel programs is a com-
plex and valuable subject that is beyond the scope of this book.

This chapter introduces the subject of code optimization and provides exam-
ples of several different techniques that attack distinct kinds of inefficiencies
and operate on different regions in the code. Chapter 9 provides a deeper
treatment of some of the techniques of program analysis that are used to
support optimization. Chapter 10 describes additional code-improvement



transformations. Instruction scheduling, in Chapter 12, and register alloca-
tion, in Chapter 13, can be considered as problems in either optimization or
code generation.

Conceptual Roadmap

The goal of code optimization is to discover, at compile time, information
about the runtime behavior of the program and to use that information to
improve the code that the compiler generates. Improvement can take many
forms. The most common goal of optimization is to make the compiled
code run faster. In some applications, however, the size of the compiled
code outweighs its speed; consider, for example, an application that will
be committed to read-only memory, where code size affects the cost of the
system. Other optimization objectives include reducing the energy cost of
execution, improving the code’s response to real-time events, and reducing
total memory traffic.

Optimizers use many different techniques to improve code. A proper discus-
sion of optimization must consider the inefficiencies that can be improved
and the techniques that can improve them. For each source of inefficiency,
the compiler writer must choose from multiple techniques that try to address
it; each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages. The compiler
writer needs to understand how those techniques identify opportunities for
improvement, how they determine that it is safe to rewrite the code, and why
the rewrite represents an improvement. Each of these issues plays a role in
successful code optimization.

Overview

Opportunities for optimization arise from many sources, but the primary one
is the implementation of source-language abstractions. Because the transla-
tion from source code into IR is a local process—it occurs without extensive
analysis of the surrounding context—it typically generates IR to handle the
most general case of each construct. With more context, the optimizer can
often determine that the code does not need that full generality; when that
happens, it can rewrite the code in a more restricted and more efficient way.

A second significant source of opportunity for the optimizer lies with the
target machine. The compiler must understand, in detail, the properties of
the target machine that affect performance. Issues such as the number of
functional units and their capabilities, the latency and bandwidth to various
levels of the memory hierarchy, the various address modes supported in the
instruction set, and the availability of unusual or complex operations all
affect the shape of the code that the compiler should generate for a given
application.



Optimization is a large and detailed subject whose study has filled complete
Safety
A transformation is safe when it does not
change the results of running the program.

Profitability
A transformation is profitable to apply at
some point when the result is an actual
improvement.

courses and books. This chapter introduces the subject. Section 8.2 explores
the concepts of safety and profitability; an optimization should only be ap-
plied when it is safe and it is expected to be profitable. Section 8.3 lays out
the different granularities, or scopes, over which optimization occurs. The
remainder of the chapter uses select examples to illustrate different sources
of improvement and different scopes of optimization. This chapter has no
Advanced Topics section; instead Chapters 9 and 10 serve that purpose.
Chapter 9 delves into static analysis, describing the kinds of analytical prob-
lems that an optimizing compiler must solve and practical techniques that
have been used to solve them. Chapter 10 examines scalar optimizations—
those intended for a uniprocessor—in a more systematic way.

A Few Words About Time

Chapter 8 provides an introduction to the subject of code optimization: both
analysis and transformation. The optimizations described in this chapter oc-
cur entirely at compile time. Conceptually, each optimization reads the IR
form of the program, analyzes it, transforms it, and writes it.

To decide whether or not to apply the optimization in a specific location in
the code being compiled, the compiler will analyze the code. In essence,
the compiler reasons about the runtime flow of values and control. It uses
that information to decide whether it is safe to apply the transformation
and whether the transformation is likely to improve the code. The compile-
time analysis supports compile-time decision-making in order to improve
runtime behavior.

8.2 BACKGROUND

Until the early 1980s, many compiler writers considered optimization as a
feature that should be added to the compiler only after its other parts were
working well. This fact led to a distinction between debugging compilers
and optimizing compilers. A debugging compiler emphasized quick com-
pilation at the expense of code quality. Debugging compilers did a simple
translation, so the compiled code retained a strong resemblance to the source
code. This correspondence simplified the task of mapping a runtime error
to a specific line of source code; hence the term debugging compiler. By
contrast, an optimizing compiler focused on improving the running time of
the executable code at the expense of compile time. Spending more time in
compilation can produce better code. With optimization, however, the map-
ping from source code to executable code is more complex and debugging
might be, accordingly, harder.



OPTIMIZATION, ANALYSIS, AND TRANSFORMATION
The compiler construction community often uses the three terms
optimization, analysis, and transformation as interchangeable. We make a
distinction between these subtly different ideas.

Optimization refers to a broad scheme for improving program performance,
such as code motion. Many algorithms exist for code motion. They differ
in how they identify code that can move and how they choose its
destination.

Analysis refers to compile-time techniques that derive knowledge about the
runtime behavior of the compiled code. In code optimization, such
analysis reveals opportunities where rewriting the code is safe and,
potentially, profitable.

Transformation refers to compile-time techniques that rewrite the code to
implement an optimization, usually based on the results of some analysis.

In some simple contexts, an optimization can be implemented in a single
pass that combines analysis and transformation. In contexts that include
complex control flow, the analysis typically must be completed before
transformation can begin.

As RISC processors moved into the marketplace and as RISC implementa-
tion techniques were applied to CISC architectures, more of the burden for
runtime performance shifted to compilers. To increase performance, proces-
sor architects turned to features that require more compiler support. These
features include delay slots after branches, nonblocking memory operations,
deeper pipelines, and more functional units. These features make processors
more performance sensitive both to high-level issues of program layout and
structure and to low-level details of scheduling and resource allocation. As
the gap between processor speed and application performance has grown,
optimization has become a routine part of every compiler.

The routine inclusion of an optimizer, in turn, changes the environment in
which both the front end and the back end operate. Optimization further
insulates the front end from performance concerns, which simplifies the task
of translation in the front end. At the same time, optimization changes the
code that the back end processes. Modern optimizers assume that the back
end will handle resource allocation; thus, they typically target an idealized
machine that has an unlimited supply of registers, memory, and functional
units. This change, in turn, gives both more freedom and more responsibility
to the compiler’s back end.



If compilers are to shoulder their share of responsibility for runtime perfor-
mance, they must include optimizers. As we shall see, the tools of optimiza-
tion also play a large role in the compiler’s back end. For these reasons, it
is important to introduce optimization and explore some of the issues that it
raises before discussing the techniques used in a compiler’s back end.

8.2.1 Examples

To provide focus, we will explore two examples in depth. The first, a simple
two-dimensional array-address calculation, shows the role that knowledge
and context play in code optimization. The second, a loop nest from the rou-
tine dmxpy in the widely used LINPACK numerical library, provides insight
into the transformation process itself and into the challenges that trans-
formed code can present to the compiler.

Improving an Array-Address Calculation

Consider the IR that a compiler’s front end might generate for an array ref-
The access method for an array in row-
major order appears in Section 7.3.2.
erence m(i,j) in FORTRAN. Without specific knowledge about the values
of m, i, and j, the compiler must generate the complete address polynomial
for a two-dimensional array in column-major order:

@m + (j - low2) × (high1 - low1 + 1) × w + (i - low1) × w

where @m is the runtime address of the first element of m, lowi and highi are
The discussion assumes that the compiler
has not transformed @m into the “false-zero”
form @m0.
the lower and upper bounds of m’s ith dimension, and w is the size of an
element of m. The compiler’s ability to reduce the cost of this computation
depends on its ability to analyze the code and its surrounding context.

If m is a local array with low1 = low2 = 1 and the value of high1 is known,
Strength reduction
a transformation that rewrites a series of
operations, such as

i·c, (i+1)·c, . . . , (i+k)·c

with an equivalent series

i′
0, i′
1, . . . , i′
k,

where i′
0 = i·c and i′
j = i′
j−1+c

See Section 10.7.2.

then the compiler can simplify the calculation to

@m + (j - 1) × hw + (i - 1) × w

where hw = high1 × w. If the reference occurs in a loop where j runs from 1
to k, the compiler might use operator strength reduction to replace the term
(j - 1) × hw with a sequence j′
1, j′
2, j′
3, ..., j′
k, where j′
1 = (1 − 1) × hw = 0
and j′
x = j′
x−1 + hw. If i is also a loop induction variable and i runs from 1
to l, then strength reduction can replace (i − 1) × w with the sequence i′
1,
i′
2, i′
3, ..., i′
l, where i′
1 = 0 and i′
x = i′
x−1 + w. After these changes, the
address calculation is just

@m + j′ + i′

Under the right circumstances, the addition in @m + j′ can be moved out of
Code motion
moving a computation to a point where it
executes less often
the inner loop (see Sections 10.3.1 and 10.7.2).



After these transformations, the j loop must increment j′ by hw and the i
loop must increment i′ by w. In this form, the address computation consists
of the increment to i′ and, perhaps, an add in the inner loop and the incre-
ment to j′ and an add in the outer loop. Knowing the context around the
reference to m(i,j) allows the compiler to significantly reduce the cost of
the array-element address expression.

If m is passed in as an actual parameter, then the compiler may not know its
upper and lower bounds at compile time. In fact, the dimensions for m might
change in different calls to the procedure. In such cases, the compiler may
be unable to simplify the address calculation, another example of the role
that context plays in performance.

Improving a Loop Nest in LINPACK

As a more dramatic example of context, consider the loop nest shown in
Fig. 8.1. It is the central loop nest of the FORTRAN routine dmxpy from the
LINPACK numerical library. The code wraps two loops around a single long
assignment. The loop nest forms the core of a routine to compute mx + y,
for a matrix m and vectors x and y. We will consider the code from two
different perspectives: first, the transformations that the author hand-applied
to improve performance, and second, the challenges that the compiler faces
in translating this loop nest to run efficiently on a specific processor.

Before the author hand-transformed the code, the loop nest performed the
following simpler version of the same computation:

do 60 j = 1, n2
do 50 i = 1, n1
y(i) = y(i) + x(j) * m(i,j)
50
continue
60 continue

To improve performance, the author unrolled the outer loop, the j loop,

Loop unrolling
Unrolling replicates the loop body for
distinct iterations and adjusts the index
calculations to match.
16 times. That rewrite created 16 copies of the assignment statement with
distinct values for j, ranging from j through j-15, and changed the outer
loop increment from 1 to 16. Next, the author merged the 16 assignments
into one statement, eliminating 15 occurrences of y(i) = y(i) + ···; that
eliminates 15 additions and most of the loads and stores of y(i). Unrolling
the loop eliminates 15 branches and some other operations. It may also im-
prove cache locality.

To handle the cases where the array bounds are not integral multiples of 16,
the full procedure has four versions of the loop nest that precede the one
shown in Fig. 8.1. These “setup loops” process up to 15 columns of m,



subroutine dmxpy (n1, y, n2, ldm, x, m)
double precision y(*), x(*), m(ldm,*)
...
jmin = j+16
do 60 j = jmin, n2, 16
do 50 i = 1, n1
y(i) = ((((((((((((((( (y(i))
$
+ x(j-15)*m(i,j-15)) + x(j-14)*m(i,j-14))
$
+ x(j-13)*m(i,j-13)) + x(j-12)*m(i,j-12))
$
+ x(j-11)*m(i,j-11)) + x(j-10)*m(i,j-10))
$
+ x(j- 9)*m(i,j- 9)) + x(j- 8)*m(i,j- 8))
$
+ x(j- 7)*m(i,j- 7)) + x(j- 6)*m(i,j- 6))
$
+ x(j- 5)*m(i,j- 5)) + x(j- 4)*m(i,j- 4))
$
+ x(j- 3)*m(i,j- 3)) + x(j- 2)*m(i,j- 2))
$
+ x(j- 1)*m(i,j- 1)) + x(j) *m(i,j)
50
continue
60
continue
...
end

■ FIGURE 8.1 Excerpt from dmxpy in LINPACK.

leaving j set to a value for which n2 - j is an integral multiple of 16. The
first loop handles a single column of m, corresponding to an odd n2. The
other three loop nests handle two, four, and eight columns of m. The setup
loops allow the final loop nest, shown in Fig. 8.1, to process 16 columns at
a time.

Ideally, the compiler would automatically transform the original loop nest
into this more efficient version, or into the most appropriate form for a given
target machine. However, few compilers include all of the optimizations
needed to accomplish that goal. In the case of dmxpy, the author performed
the optimizations by hand to produce good performance across a wide range
of target machines and compilers.

From the compiler’s perspective, mapping the loop nest shown in Fig. 8.1
onto the target machine presents some hard challenges. The loop nest con-
tains 33 distinct array-address expressions, 16 for m, 16 for x, and one for y.
Unless the compiler can simplify those address calculations, the loop will
be awash in integer arithmetic.

Consider the references to x. They do not change during execution of the
Assume lower bounds of one for the arrays,
which is standard in FORTRAN.
inner loop, which varies i. The optimizer can move the address calculations
and the loads for x out of the inner loop. If it can keep the x values in regis-
ters, it can eliminate a large part of the overhead from the inner loop. For a



reference such as x(j-12), the address calculation is @x + (j − 12 − 1) × w.
To simplify further, the compiler can refactor all 16 references to x into
the form @x + jw − ck, where jw is j × w and ck is (k + 1) × w for each
0 ≤ k ≤ 15. In this form, each load uses the same base address, @x + jw,
with a distinct constant offset, ck.

Mapping this calculation efficiently onto the target machine requires knowl-
edge of the available address modes. If the target machine has a load oper-
ation with an address-immediate address mode (e.g., loadAI), then it can
rewrite the accesses to x so that they use a single induction variable that
starts at @x + jmin × w; the j loop increments it by 16 × w.

Each iteration of the inner loop uses a different set of locations in m. Thus,
the inner loop must compute new addresses and load new values for each
of the 16 elements of m on each iteration. Careful refactoring of the address
expressions, combined with strength reduction, can reduce the overhead of
accessing m. The compiler can arrange to compute the address of m(1,j) in
the j loop. It can then use distinct constant offsets in the load operations for
each of the 15 other loads.

To achieve this code shape, the compiler must refactor the address expres-
sions, perform strength reduction, recognize loop-invariant calculations and
move them out of inner loops, and choose the appropriate address mode
for the loads. Even with these improvements, the inner loop must perform
17 loads, 16 floating-point multiplies, and 16 floating-point adds, plus one
store. The resulting block of code will challenge both the instruction sched-
uler and the register allocator.

If the compiler fails in some part of this transformation sequence, the re-
Memory bound
A loop where loads and stores take more
cycles than does computation is considered
memory bound.

To determine if a loop is memory bound
requires detailed knowledge about both the
loop and the target machine.

sulting code might be substantially worse than the original. For example, if
the compiler cannot refactor the address expressions around common base
addresses for x and m, the code might need 33 distinct induction variables—
one for each distinct location of x, m, and y. If the resulting demand for
registers forced the register allocator to spill, that would insert more loads
and stores into the memory-bound inner loop. In cases such as this one,
the quality of code produced by the compiler depends on an orchestrated
series of transformations that all must work; when one fails to achieve its
purpose, the overall sequence may produce lower quality code than the user
expects.

8.2.2 Considerations for Optimization

In dmxpy, the programmer applied the transformations by hand in the belief
that they would make the program run faster. (They did.) The programmer
also had to know that the changes would preserve the program’s meaning.



DEFINING SAFETY
Correctness is the single most important criterion that a compiler must
meet—the code that the compiler produces must have the same meaning
as the input program. Each time the optimizer applies a transformation, that
action must preserve the correctness of the translation.

Typically, meaning is defined as the program’s observable behavior—that is,
the state of its memory just before it halts, along with any output it
generates. If the program terminates, the values of all visible variables
immediately before it halts should be the same under any translation
scheme. For an interactive program, behavior is more complex and difficult
to capture.

Plotkin formalized this notion as observational equivalence.

Fortwoexpressions,MandN,wesaythatMandNareobservationally
equivalent if and only if, in any context C where both M and N are
closed(thatis,havenofreevariables),evaluatingC[M]andC[N]either
produces identical results or neither terminates [295].

Thus, two expressions are observationally equivalent if their impacts on the
visible, external environment are identical.

In practice, compilers use a simpler and looser notion of equivalence,
namely, that if, in their actual program context, two different expressions M
and N produce identical results, then the compiler can substitute N for M.
This standard deals only with contexts that actually arise in the program.
Tailoring code to context is the essence of optimization. It does not mention
what happens when a computation goes awry, or diverges.

In practice, compilers take care not to introduce divergence; that is, they
avoid creating code that either loops indefinitely or throws an exception
such as division by zero. The opposite case, where the original code would
diverge, but the optimized code does not, is rarely mentioned.

Safety, profitability, and risk each play a critical role in the compiler’s deci-
sion to apply a given transformation at a specific location in the code.

The compiler needs a mechanism to prove that each application of the
transformation is safe—that is, the transformation preserves the program’s
meaning. The compiler must have a reason to believe that applying the
transformation is profitable—that is, the transformation will improve the
program’s performance. Finally, the compiler must understand the ways in
which a rewrite might make the code worse—the risk that it is not profitable.
The compiler writer needs to consider all three factors when designing and
building the decision mechanisms that choose where to transform the code.



Safety

How did the LINPACK programmer know that the transformations were
safe? That is, why did the programmer believe that the transformed code
would produce the same results as the original code? Close examination of
the loop nest shows that the only interaction between successive iterations
occurs through the elements of y.

■
A value computed as y(i) is not reused until the next iteration of the
outer loop. The iterations of the inner loop are independent of each other,
because each iteration defines precisely one value and no other inner-
loop iteration references that value. Thus, the iterations can execute in
any order. (For example, reversing the inner loop would produce the
same results.)

■
The interaction through y is limited in its effect. The ith element of y ac-
cumulates the sum of all the ith iterations of the inner loop. The unrolled
loop reproduces this pattern.

A large part of the analysis done in optimization goes toward proving the
safety of transformations.

Profitability

Why did the LINPACK programmer think that loop unrolling would im-
prove performance? That is, why is the transformation profitable? Several
different effects of unrolling might speed up the code.

■
The number of loop iterations decreases by a factor of 16, which re-
duces the number of operations used to control the loop: adds, jumps,
and branches. These savings can be significant.

This effect might suggest unrolling by an even larger factor. Finite re-
source limits probably dictated the choice of 16. (See the discussion of
demand for registers on the next page.)

■
The array-address calculations contain duplicated work. Consider the
use of y(i). The original code computed y(i)’s address once per mul-
tiplication of x and m. The transformed code computes it once per 16
multiplications; it does 1

16 as much work. The 16 references to m, and to
a lesser extent x, also include common portions that the loop can com-
pute once and reuse.

■
The transformed loop performs more floating-point operations per mem-

The argument assumes that x(j) resides in
a register.
ory operation. The original loop performed two floating-point operations
per three memory operations; the unrolled loop performs 32 floating-
point operations for 18 memory operations, assuming that all the x val-
ues reside in registers. Thus, the unrolled loop is less likely to be memory



bound. It has enough independent arithmetic to overlap the loads and
hide some of their latencies.

Unrolling can help with other machine-dependent effects. It increases the
If the inner loop grows larger than the code
cache, performance may suffer.
amount of code in the inner loop, which may provide the instruction sched-
uler with more opportunities to hide latencies. If the end-of-loop branch
has a long latency, the longer loop body may let the compiler fill more of
that branch’s delay slots. On some processors, unused delay slots must be
filled with nops, in which case loop unrolling can decrease the number of
nops fetched, reduce memory traffic, and, perhaps, reduce the energy used
to execute the program.

Risk

If transformations intended to improve performance can make it harder for
the compiler to generate good code, those issues should factor into the prof-
itability decision. The hand transformations to dmxpy created new challenges
for a compiler, including the following:

■
Demand for Registers The original loop needs only a handful of reg-
isters to hold its active values. It needs floating-point registers for y(i),
x(j), and m(i,j). It needs general purpose registers for the address cal-
culations for x, y, and m. The loop index variables need registers across
loop iterations. By contrast, the transformed loop needs floating-point
registers for the 16 elements of x, the 16 values of m, and one value of
y(i), along with the same general purpose registers.

■
Form of Address Calculation The original loop deals with three ad-
dresses, one each for y, x, and m. Because the transformed loop refers to
more distinct locations in each iteration, the compiler must shape the ad-
dress calculations carefully to avoid repeated calculations and excessive
demand for registers. In the worst case, the code could compute com-
plete addresses for all 16 elements of x, all 16 elements of m, and one
element of y.
If the compiler carefully shapes the address calculations, it can use a
single base address, or pointer, for m and another for x, each with 16
constant-valued offsets. It can rewrite the loop to use one of those point-
ers in the end-of-loop test, obviating the need for another register and
eliminating another update (see Section 10.7.2). Planning and optimiza-
tion make the difference.

Other problems of a machine-specific nature arise as well. For example, the
17 loads and one store, the 16 multiplies, the 16 adds, plus the address cal-
culations and loop-overhead operations in each iteration must be scheduled
with care. The compiler may need to use software pipelining to schedule



some of the load operations so that they issue in a previous iteration to al-
low the initial arithmetic operations in the iteration to run in a timely fashion
(see Section 12.5).

8.2.3 Opportunities for Optimization

As we have seen, the task of optimizing a simple loop can involve complex
considerations. In general, optimizing compilers capitalize on opportunities
that arise from several distinct sources.

1. Reducing the Overhead of Abstraction As we saw in dmxpy, data struc-
tures and types introduced by programming languages introduce runtime
address calculations. Optimizers use analysis and transformation to re-
duce this overhead.
2. Taking Advantage of Special Cases Often, the compiler can use knowl-
edge about the context in which an operation executes to specialize that
operation. As an example, a C++ compiler can sometimes determine that
a call to a virtual function always uses the same implementation. In that
case, it can convert the virtual call to a less expensive static call.
3. Matching the Code to System Resources If a program’s resource require-
ments differ from the processor’s capacities, the compiler may transform
the code to align its needs more closely with available resources. The
transformations applied to dmxpy have this effect; they decrease the num-
ber of memory accesses per floating-point operation.

These are broad areas, described in sweeping generality. As we discuss spe-
cific analysis and transformation techniques, in Chapters 9 and 10, we will
fill in these areas with more detailed examples.

SECTION REVIEW
Most compiler-based optimization works by specializing general purpose
code to its actual context. For some transformations, the benefits accrue
from local effects, as with the improvements in array-address calculations.
Other transformations require broad knowledge of larger regions in the
code and accrue their benefits from effects that occur over larger swaths of
the code.

The implementation of any optimization must address three key issues.
(1) How can the compiler efficiently find opportunities to apply the
transformation? (2) Is the optimization safe in this context? (3) Will the
optimization improve the code?



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In the code fragment from dmxpy, why did the programmer unroll the
outer loop rather than the inner loop? How would the results differ had
she unrolled the inner loop rather than the outer loop?

2.
In the C fragment shown below, what facts would the compiler need
to discover before it could improve the code beyond a simple byte-
oriented, load/store implementation?

MemCopy(char *source, char *dest, int length) {
int i;
for (i=1; i≤length; i++) {
*dest++ = *source++;
}
}

8.3 SCOPE OF OPTIMIZATION

Optimizations operate at different granularities or scopes. In the previous
Scope of optimization
The region of code that an optimization
analyzes and transforms is its scope of
optimization.

section, we looked at optimization of a single array reference and of an en-
tire loop nest. These different scopes presented different opportunities to the
optimizer. Reformulating the array reference improved performance of the
code for that one reference. Rewriting the loop nest improved performance
across a larger region. In general, transformations and the analyses that sup-
port them operate on one of four distinct scopes: local, regional, global, or
interprocedural.

Local Methods

Local methods operate over a single basic block: a maximal-length sequence
of branch-free code. In an ILOC program, a basic block begins with a la-
beled operation and ends with a branch or a jump. In ILOC, the operation
after a branch or jump must be labeled or else it cannot be reached; other
notations allow a “fall-through” branch so that the operation after a branch
or jump need not be labeled. The behavior of straight-line code is easier to
analyze and understand than is code that contains branches and cycles.

Inside a basic block, two important properties hold. First, statements are
executed sequentially. Second, if any statement executes, the entire block
executes, unless a runtime exception occurs. These two properties let the
compiler prove, with relatively simple analyses, facts that may be stronger
than those provable for scopes that contain conditional or cyclic control



flow (if statements and loops). Thus, local methods sometimes make im-
provements that cannot be obtained for larger scopes. At the same time,
local methods can only improve code sequences that occur entirely inside
the same block.

Regional Methods

Regional methods operate over scopes larger than a single block but smaller
than a full procedure. In the example control-flow graph (CFG) in the mar-
gin, the compiler might consider the entire loop, {B0, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6},
as a single region. In some cases, considering a subset of the code pro-
duces sharper analysis and better transformation results than would occur
with information from the full procedure. For example, inside a loop nest,
the compiler may be able to prove that a heavily used pointer is invariant
(single-valued), even though it is modified elsewhere in the procedure. Such
knowledge can enable optimizations such as keeping the value referenced
through that pointer in a register throughout the loop nest.

The compiler can choose regions in many different ways. A region might
be defined by some source-code control structure, such as a loop nest.
The compiler might look at the subset of blocks in the region that form
an extended basic block (EBB). The example CFG contains three EBBs:
Extended basic block
a set of blocks { B0, B1, . . . , Bk } where ei-
ther B0 is the entry node or B0 has multiple
CFG predecessors, and every other Bi has
just one predecessor, which is in the set

Dominator
In a CFG, x dominates y if and only if every
path from the root to y includes x.

{B0, B1, B3, B4, B6}, {B5}, and {B2}. While the two single-block EBBs
provide no advantage over a purely local view, the large EBB may offer op-
portunities for optimization (see Section 8.5.1). Finally, the compiler might
consider a subset of the CFG defined by some graph-theoretic property, such
as a dominator relation or a strongly connected component in the CFG.

Regional methods have several strengths. Focusing on a region smaller than
the entire procedure lets the compiler concentrate its efforts on heavily ex-
ecuted regions, such as the body of a loop. (A key observation in code
optimization is that the body of a loop almost always executes more fre-
quently than the surrounding code.) With regional methods, the compiler
can apply different optimization strategies to distinct regions. Finally, the
focus on a limited area in the code can let the compiler derive sharper in-
formation about program behavior which, in turn, may expose opportunities
for improvement.

Intraprocedural Methods

These methods, also called global methods, use an entire procedure as con-
text. The motivation for global methods is simple: decisions that are locally
optimal may have bad consequences larger contexts. The procedure pro-
vides the compiler with a natural boundary for analysis and transformation.



INTRAPROCEDURAL VERSUS INTERPROCEDURAL
Few terms in compilation create as much confusion as the word global.
Global optimizations operate on an entire procedure. The modern
connotation, however, suggests an all-encompassing scope, similar to that
of a global variable. In optimization, however, global means “pertaining to a
single procedure.”

As interest in analysis and optimization across procedure boundaries grew,
the community needed terminology to differentiate between global analysis
and analysis over larger scopes. Interprocedural was introduced to describe
analysis that ranged from two procedures to a whole program. Accordingly,
authors began to use intraprocedural for single-procedure techniques. Since
these words are so close in spelling and pronunciation, they are easy to
confuse and awkward to use.

One company, Perkin-Elmer Corporation, introduced the term universal to
describe whole-program optimization. The term never gained popularity.
We prefer the term whole program and use it whenever possible. It conveys
the right distinction and reminds the reader that “global” is not “universal.”

Procedures are abstractions that encapsulate and insulate runtime environ-
ments. They also serve as units of separate compilation in many systems.

Global methods typically operate by building a representation of the proce-
dure, analyzing that representation, and transforming the underlying code.
If the CFG has cycles, the compiler must analyze the entire procedure be-
fore it understands what facts hold on entrance to any specific block. Thus,
most global optimizations have separate analysis and transformation phases.
The analysis phase gathers facts and reasons about them. The transforma-
tion phase uses those facts to determine the safety and expected profitability
of the transformations. By virtue of their global view, these methods can
discover opportunities that neither local nor regional methods can.

Interprocedural Methods

These methods, sometimes called whole-program methods, consider scopes
The term “whole program” clearly implies
that the technique considers all of the code.
We prefer the term “interprocedural” for
techniques that analyze some, but not all,
of the procedures and “whole program” for
those that examine the entire program.

larger than a single procedure. We consider any transformation that involves
more than one procedure to be an interprocedural transformation. Just as
moving from a local scope to a global scope exposes new opportunities, so
moving from single procedures to multiple procedures can expose new op-
portunities. It also raises new challenges. For example, name scope rules
limit interactions between expressions in different procedures, and parame-
ter binding complicates static analysis across procedure boundaries.



Interprocedural analysis and optimization occurs, at least conceptually, on
the program’s call graph. In some cases, these techniques analyze the entire
program; in other cases, they may examine a subset of the program. Two
classic examples of interprocedural optimizations are inline substitution,
which replaces a call with a copy of the code for the callee, and interproce-
dural constant propagation, which propagates information about constants
across the whole program.

SECTION REVIEW
Compilers perform both analysis and transformation over a variety of
scopes, ranging from single basic blocks (local methods) to entire programs
(whole-program methods). The set of available opportunities changes at
different scopes; intuition suggests more opportunities in larger scopes.
However, analyzing larger scopes often produces less precise knowledge
about the code’s behavior. Thus, no simple relationship exists between
scope of optimization and code quality. It would be intellectually pleasing if
larger optimization scopes led, in general, to better code. Unfortunately,
that relationship does not necessarily hold true.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Basic blocks have the property that if one operation executes, every
operation in the block executes in a specified order (unless an excep-
tion occurs). State the weaker property that holds in an extended basic
block.

2.
The PL/I Optimizing Compiler was one of the first compilers to perform
interprocedural analysis and optimization. However, it limited its scope
to the set of procedures found in a single file. Justify this decision. What
problems might arise if the compiler optimized a scope with multiple
files?

8.4 LOCAL OPTIMIZATION

Local optimizations are among the simplest methods that the compiler can
use. The simple execution model of a basic block, with serial execution of a
single path, leads to reasonably precise analysis in support of optimization.
Thus, these methods are surprisingly effective.

This section presents two local methods as examples. The first, value num-
Redundant
An expression e is redundant at p if it has
already been evaluated on every path that
leads to p.
bering, finds redundant expressions in a basic block and replaces the redun-
dant evaluations with reuse of a previously computed value. The second,



tree-height balancing, reorganizes expression trees to expose more oppor-
tunities to the scheduler.

8.4.1 Local Value Numbering

Consider the four-statement basic block shown in the margin. An expres-
a ← b + c

b ← a - d

c ← b + c

d ← a - d

Original Block

a ← b + c

b ← a - d

c ← b + c

d ← b

Rewritten Block

sion, such as b + c or a - d, is redundant in a block if and only if it has been
previously computed in the block and no intervening operation redefines
one of its constituent arguments. In the example, the occurrence of b + c
in the third operation is not redundant because the second operation rede-
fines b. The occurrence of a - d in the fourth operation is redundant because
the block does not redefine either a or d between the second and fourth op-
erations.

The compiler can rewrite this block so that it computes a - d once, as shown.
The second evaluation of a - d is replaced with a copy from b. An alternative
strategy would replace subsequent uses of d with uses of b. However, that
approach requires analysis to determine whether or not b is redefined before
each later use of d. In practice, it is simpler to have the optimizer insert a
Coalescing
a method that removes an unneeded copy,
a ← b, by combining a and b
copy and let later passes determine whether or not the copy is needed (see
the discussion of copy coalescing in Section 13.4.3).

In general, replacing redundant evaluations with references to previously
Lifetime
In the context of optimization, a value’s
lifetime is the region of code between its
definitions and its uses.

In a block, a value’s lifetime is the interval
from its definition to its last use.

computed values is profitable—that is, the resulting code runs more quickly
than the original. However, profitability is not guaranteed. Replacing
d ← a - d with d ← b has the potential to extend the lifetime of b and to
shorten the lifetimes of either a or d or both—depending, in each case,
on where the value’s last use lies. Depending on the precise details, each
rewrite can increase, decrease, or leave unchanged the demand for registers.
Replacing a redundant computation with a reference is likely to be profitable
unless the rewrite causes the register allocator to spill additional values.

In practice, the optimizer cannot consistently predict the behavior of the
register allocator, in part because the code will be further transformed before
allocation. Therefore, most redundancy elimination algorithms assume that
rewriting to avoid redundancy is profitable.

In the previous example, the redundant expression was textually identical to
a ← b × c

d ← b

e ← d × c

Effect of Assignment

the earlier instance. Assignment can, of course, produce a redundant expres-
sion that differs textually from its predecessor. Consider the block shown in
the margin. The assignment d ← b makes the expression d × c produce the
same value as b × c. To recognize this case, the compiler must track the flow
of values through names. Techniques that rely on textual identity do not
detect such cases.



for i ← 1 to n, where the block has n operations in the form “ Ti ← Li Opi Ri” do

get the value numbers V1 and V2 for Li and Ri

if Ti has no table entry then
create a table entry for Ti

construct a hash key, k, as ⟨V1,Opi,V2 ⟩

if k is already present in the table then
replace operation i with “ Ti ← x”, where x is the name stored under the key k

else
create a table entry for k
generate a new value number for k and store it in k’s table entry
store the name Ti in k’s table entry

store k’s value number in the table entry for Ti

■ FIGURE 8.2 Value Numbering a Single Block.

Programmers will protest that they do not write code that contains redun-
The assignment to y(i) in Fig. 8.1 will
create multiple redundant subexpressions
from the various address polynomials.
dant expressions similar to those in the example. In practice, redundancy
elimination finds many opportunities. Translation from source code to IR
elaborates many details, such as address calculations, and introduces redun-
dant expressions.

Many techniques have been developed to find and eliminate redundancies.
Local value numbering (LVN) is one of the oldest and most powerful of
these transformations. It discovers redundancies within a basic block and
rewrites the block to avoid them. It provides a simple and efficient frame-
work for other local optimizations, such as constant folding and simplifica-
tion using algebraic identities.

The Algorithm

The idea behind LVN is simple. The algorithm traverses a basic block and
assigns a distinct number to each value that the block computes. It chooses
the numbers so that two expressions, M and N, have the same value number
if and only if M and N have provably equal values for all possible executions
of the block.

Fig. 8.2 shows the basic LVN algorithm. LVN takes as input a block with
n binary operations, each of the form Ti ← Li Opi Ri. LVN examines each
operation, in order. It uses a hash table to map names, constants, and ex-
pressions into distinct value numbers. The hash table is initially empty.

To process the ith operation, LVN obtains value numbers for Li and Ri by
searching for them in the hash table. If it finds an entry, LVN uses the value



THE IMPORTANCE OF ORDER
The specific order in which expressions are written has a direct impact on
the ability of optimizations to analyze and transform them. Consider the
application of local value numbering to two distinct encodings of
v ← a × b × c:

t0 ← a × b
v ← t0 × c
t0 ← b × c
v ← a × t0

The encoding on the left assigns value numbers to a, b, a × b, c, (a × b) × c and
v, while the encoding on the right assigns value numbers to b, c, b × c, a,
a × (b × c) and v. Depending on the surrounding context, one of these may
be preferable. For example, if b × c occurs later in the block but a × b does not,
then the right-hand encoding produces redundancy while the left does not.

In general, using commutativity, associativity, and distributivity to reorder
expressions can change the results of optimization. Similar effects can be
seen with constant folding; if we replace a with 3 and c with 5, neither
ordering produces the constant operation 3 × 5, which can be folded.

Because the number of ways to reorder expressions is prohibitively large,
compilers use heuristic techniques to find good orderings for expressions.
For example, the IBM FORTRAN H compiler generated array-address
computations in an order that tended to improve other optimizations. Other
compilers have sorted the operands of commutative and associative
operations into an order that corresponds to the loop nesting level at which
they are defined. Because so many solutions are possible, heuristic solutions
for this problem often require experimentation and tuning to discover what
is appropriate for a specific language, compiler, and coding style.

number of that entry. If not, it creates a new entry and assigns it a new value
number.

Given value numbers for Li and Ri, denoted V1 and V2, LVN constructs a
hash key from ⟨V1, Opi, V2⟩ and looks up that key in the table. If an entry
exists, the expression is redundant and can be replaced by a reference to the
previously computed value. If not, then operation i is the first computation
of Li Opi Ri in the block, so LVN creates an entry for its hash key and assigns
that entry a new value number. It also assigns the hash key’s value number,
whether new or preexisting, to the table entry for Ti. Because LVN uses value
numbers to construct the expression’s hash key, rather than names, it can
effectively track the flow of values through copy and assignment operations,
such as the small example labeled “Effect of Assignment” on page 395.
Extending LVN to expressions of arbitrary arity is simple.



a + 0 = a
a - 0 = a
a - a = 0
2 × a = a + a

a × 1 = a
a × 0 = 0
a ÷ 1 = a
a ÷ a = 1, a ̸= 0

a1 = a
a2 = a × a
a ≫ 0 = a
a ≪ 0 = a

a AND a = a
a OR a = a
MAX(a,a) = a
MIN(a,a) = a

■ FIGURE 8.3 Algebraic Identities for Value Numbering.

To see how LVN computes value numbers, consider our example, repeated
a2 ← b0 + c1

b4 ← a2 - d3

c5 ← b4 + c1

d4 ← a2 - d3

Example with Value Numbers

in the margin. Each name is annotated with the value number that LVN as-
sign to it, shown as a superscript. In the first operation, with an empty value
table, b and c get new value numbers, 0 and 1, respectively. LVN constructs
the textual string “0 + 1” as a hash key for the expression b + c and performs
a lookup. It does not find an entry for that key, so the lookup fails. Accord-
ingly, LVN creates a new entry for “0 + 1” and assigns it value number 2.
LVN then creates an entry for a and assigns it the value number of the ex-
pression, namely 2. Repeating this process for each operation, in sequential
order, produces the rest of the value numbers shown in the margin.

The value numbers reveal, correctly, that the two occurrences of b + c pro-
a ← b + c

b ← a - d

c ← b + c

d ← b

Example After Rewrite

duce different values, due to the intervening redefinition of b. They also
show that the two occurrences of a - d produce the same value. In both
occurrences of a - d, a has the same value number; d does, as well. LVN
discovers this fact and records it by assigning b and d the same value num-
ber, namely 4. That knowledge lets LVN rewrite the fourth operation with a
d ← b as shown in the margin. Subsequent passes may coalesce and elimi-
nate the copy operation.

Extending the Algorithm

LVN provides a framework for several other local optimizations.

Commutative Operations
Variants of a commutative expression, such as
a × b and b × a, should receive the same value number. As LVN con-
structs a hash key for the right-hand side of the current operation, it
can sort the operands using some convenient scheme, such as ordering
them by value number. This simple action will ensure that variants of a
commutative expression receive the same value number.

Constant Folding
If all the operands of an operation have known con-
stant values, LVN can perform the operation at compile time and fold
the answer directly into the code. LVN can mark hash table entries as
constants and store their values alongside their value numbers. When
LVN discovers a constant expression, it can evaluate the expression and
replace the expression with a literal constant value.



for i ← 1 to n, where the block has n operations in the form “ Ti ← Li Opi Ri” do

get the value numbers V1 and V2 for Li and Ri
if Ti has no table entry then

create a table entry for Ti

if Opi commutes and V1 > V2 then

swap V1 and V2

construct a hash key, k, as ⟨V1,Opi,V2 ⟩

if k is already present in the table then

replace operation i with “ Ti ← x”, where x is the constant value

or name stored under the key k

else

create a table entry for k

generate a new value number for k and store it in k’s table entry

store the name Ti in k’s table entry

if V1 and V2 are both marked as constant then

evaluate Li Opi Ri into c

replace operation i with “ Ti ← c”

store c in the table entries for k and Ti

else if Li Opi Ri matches an algebraic identity then

replace operation i with the simplified version

store k’s value number in the table entry for Ti

■ FIGURE 8.4 Local Value Numbering with Extensions.

Algebraic Identities
LVN can use algebraic identities to simplify the
code. For example, x + 0 and x should receive the same value number.
Unfortunately, LVN needs special-case code for each identity. A se-
ries of tests, one per identity, would significantly slow down LVN. To
ameliorate this problem, LVN should organize the tests into operator-
specific decision trees. Since each operator has just a few identities, this
approach keeps the overhead low. Fig. 8.3 shows some of the identities
that can be handled in LVN.

A clever implementor will discover other identities, including some that
NaN
Not a Number is a defined constant that
represents an invalid or meaningless result
in the IEEE standard for floating-point
arithmetic.

are type specific. The exclusive-or of two identical values should yield
a zero of the appropriate type. Numbers in IEEE floating-point format
have their own special cases introduced by the explicit representations
of ∞ and NaN ; for example, ∞ − ∞ = NaN ; ∞ − NaN = NaN ; and
∞ ÷ NaN = NaN.

Fig. 8.4 shows LVN with these extensions. To handle commutative opera-
tions, it sorts the operands by their value numbers before it constructs the
hash key. It evaluates constant expressions and applies algebraic identities.



Even with these extensions, the cost per IR operation remains extremely low
because each step has an efficient implementation.

The Role of Naming

The choice of names for variables and values can limit the effectiveness of
a2 ← x0 + y1

b2 ← x0 + y1

a3 ← 17 3

c2 ← x0 + y1

Example with Value Numbers

value numbering. Consider what happens when LVN is applied to the block
shown in the margin. Again, the superscripts indicate the value numbers
assigned to each name and value.

In the first operation, LVN assigns 0 to x, 1 to y, and 2 to both x + y and a.
At the second operation, it discovers that x + y is redundant, with value num-
ber 2; thus, LVN can rewrite b ← x + y with b ← a. The third operation is not
redundant. At the fourth operation, LVN again discovers that x + y has value
number 2. It cannot, however, rewrite the operation as c ← a because a no
longer holds value number 2.

LVN can address this problem in two distinct ways. It can keep a map from
value numbers to names. At each operation, it must update the map. Say
the operation defines t. LVN must remove t from the list for its old value
number and add t to the list for its new value number. At a replacement,
LVN can use any name currently in the map for that value number. This
approach adds some cost to the processing of each operation. It also clutters
up the basic algorithm.

As an alternative, the compiler can rewrite the code so that each operation
a2
0 ← x0
0 + y1
0

b2
0 ← x0
0 + y1
0

a3
1 ← 17 3

c2
0 ← x0
0 + y1
0

Example After Renaming

defines a unique name. Adding a subscript to each name for uniqueness, as
shown in the margin, is sufficient. With these new names, the code defines
each value exactly once. Thus, no value is ever redefined and lost, or killed.
If we apply LVN to this block, it produces the desired result. It proves that
the second and fourth operations are redundant; each can be replaced with
a copy from a0. (Notice that, after renaming, a0 is live over a longer region
in the code than a was.)

However, the compiler must now reconcile these subscripted names with
the names in surrounding blocks to preserve the meaning of the original
code. In our example, the original name a should refer to the value from the
subscripted name a1 in the rewritten code. A clever implementation would
map the new a1 to the original a, b0 to the original b, and c0 to the original c; it
would also rename a0 to a new temporary name. That solution reconciles the
name space of the transformed block with the surrounding context without
introducing copies.

This naming scheme approximates one property of the name space created
for static single-assignment form, or SSA (see Sections 4.6.2 and 9.3). From



RUNTIME EXCEPTIONS AND OPTIMIZATION
Some abnormal runtime conditions can raise exceptions. Examples include
out-of-bounds memory references, undefined arithmetic operations such as
division by zero, and illegal operations. (One way for a debugger to trigger a
breakpoint is to replace the instruction with an illegal one and to catch the
exception.) Some languages include features for handling exceptions, for
both predefined and programmer-defined situations.

Typically, a runtime exception causes a transfer of control to an “exception
handler,” code designed to deal with the exception. The handler may cure
the problem, reexecute the offending operation, and return control to the
block. Alternatively, it may transfer control elsewhere or terminate execution.

The optimizer must understand which operations can raise an exception
and must consider the impact of an exception on program execution.
Because an exception handler might modify the values of variables or
transfer control, the compiler must treat exception-raising operations
conservatively. For example, every exception-raising operation might end
the current basic block. Such treatment can severely limit the optimizer’s
ability to improve the code.

To optimize exception-laden code, the compiler needs to understand and
model the effects of exception handlers. To do so, it needs access to the
code for the exception handlers and it needs to understand which handlers
might be in place when a specific exception-raising operation executes.

a design perspective, the simple solution is to apply LVN to code that is
already in SSA form.

The Impact of Indirect Assignments

The previous discussion assumes that assignments are direct and obvious,
Ambiguous reference
A reference is ambiguous if the compiler
cannot isolate it to a single memory loca-
tion.

as in a ← b × c. Many programs contain indirect assignments, where the
compiler may not know which values are modified because the reference
is ambiguous. Examples include (1) assignment through a pointer, such as

*p = 0; in C; (2) assignment to a structure element or an array element, such
as a(i,j) = 0 in FORTRAN; or (3) assignment through a call-by-reference
parameter. Indirect assignments complicate value numbering and other opti-
mizations because they create imprecisions in the compiler’s understanding
of the flow of values.

Assume, without loss of generality, that the names in our examples are
memory addresses. Consider the impact that an indirect assignment, such
as *p = 0, must have on the state of LVN. Unless the compiler knows the ad-
dress contained in p, it must assume that any location that p might address



■ FIGURE 8.5 Potential Tree Shapes for a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h.

has been changed. In an implementation of LVN where names represent
memory locations, an ambiguous assignment would give each name its own
new value number.

While this sounds drastic, it shows the true impact of an ambiguous assign-
ment on the set of facts that the compiler can derive. The compiler can try to
disambiguate references. For pointer-based references, it can perform anal-
ysis to narrow the set of variables that the compiler believes a pointer can
address. A variety of techniques help the compiler understand the patterns of
element access in an array—again, to shrink the set of locations that it must
assume might be modified by an assignment to one element. Interprocedu-
ral alias analysis can resolve some of the ambiguities caused by interactions
between parameter binding and name scoping rules.

8.4.2 Tree-Height Balancing

Expression optimization for multiple functional units demonstrates the im-
pact that code shape can have on the compiler’s ability to improve a compu-
tation. Most processors have several functional units; those units can execute
independent operations in each cycle. If the compiler can express the com-
putation so that it presents independent operations, the scheduler and the
processor may be able to execute them concurrently; if, instead, the com-
piler introduces unnecessary sequential constraints, the scheduler and the
processor may not find enough concurrency to occupy the functional units.

Consider the expression a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h. The code in the margin en-

t1 ← a + b

t2 ← t1 + c

t3 ← t2 + d

t4 ← t3 + e

t5 ← t4 + f

t6 ← t5 + g

t7 ← t6 + h

Left-to-Right Evaluation of

a + b + c + d + e + f + g + h

codes a left-to-right evaluation, which is equivalent to a postorder walk of
the left-associative tree in Fig. 8.5(a). A right-to-left evaluation of the ex-
pression would correspond to the tree in panel (b). Each tree constrains the
execution order in ways that are more restrictive than the rules of addition.
The left-associative tree forces the code to evaluate a + b before it can add
either g or h. The right-associative tree requires that g + h precede additions



Adder 0
Adder 1

1
t1 ← a + b
—

2
t2 ← t1 + c
—

3
t3 ← t2 + d
—

4
t4 ← t3 + e
—

5
t5 ← t4 + f
—

6
t6 ← t5 + g
—

7
t7 ← t6 + h
—

Adder 0
Adder 1

1
t1 ← a + b
t2 ← c + d

2
t3 ← e + f
t4 ← g + h

3
t5 ← t1 + t2
t6 ← t3 + t4

4
t7 ← t5 + t6
—

5
—
—

6
—
—

7
—
—

(a) Left-Associative Tree
(b) Balanced Tree

■ FIGURE 8.6 Schedules from Trees in Fig. 8.5.

involving a or b. The balanced tree in panel (c) imposes fewer constraints,
but it still restricts evaluation order more than addition does.

If the processor can perform multiple concurrent additions, then the bal-
anced tree should lead to a shorter schedule for the computation. Fig. 8.6
shows the shortest possible schedules for the balanced tree and the left-
associative tree on a computer with two single-cycle adders. The balanced
tree can execute in four cycles, with one unit idle in the fourth cycle. By
contrast, the left-associative tree takes seven cycles to execute because it
serializes the additions. It leaves one adder completely idle. The right-
associative tree produces similar results.

This small example suggests an important optimization: using commutativ-
Instruction-level parallelism
Operations that are independent can execute
in the same cycle. This kind of concurrency
is called instruction-level parallelism.

ity and associativity to expose additional parallelism in expression evalu-
ation. The rest of this section presents an algorithm that rewrites a single
block to improve balance across its forest of expression trees. This transfor-
mation exposes more instruction-level parallelism (ILP) to the instruction
scheduler.

Candidate Trees

As a first step, the algorithm must identify trees that are promising candi-
dates for rebalancing. A candidate tree, or subtree, must contain only one
kind of operator, such as + or ×. That operator must be both associative and
commutative to allow rearrangement of the operands. The tree should be as
large as possible, to maximize ILP. If the tree is too small, the optimization
will make no difference.

To ensure that the rewritten code works in its surrounding context, that code
must preserve any values that are used outside of the expression. A value



// All operations have the form “ Ti ← Li Opi Ri”

// Phase 1: build a queue, Roots, of the candidate trees

Roots ← new empty queue

for i ← 0 to n - 1 do

Rank(Ti ) ← -1

if Opi is commutative and associative and Ti is exposed then

mark Ti as a root

Enqueue(Roots, Ti , precedence of Opi )

// Phase 2: remove a tree from Roots and rebalance it

while (Roots is not empty) do

var ← Dequeue(Roots)

Balance(var)

■ FIGURE 8.7 Tree-Height Balancing Algorithm.

is exposed if it is used after the block, if it is used more than once within
the block, or if it appears as an argument to an operator of another type.
Exposed values must be preserved—that is, the rewritten computation must
produce the same result for the exposed value as the original computation.
This restriction can constrain the algorithm’s ability to rearrange code.

The code fragment shown in the margin computes two large expressions:

t1 ← a + b

t2 ← t1 + c

m ← t2 + d

t3 ← t2 × e

t4 ← t3 × f

n ← t4 × g

Example Basic Block

m ← (a + b + c + d), and n ← (a + b + c) × e × f × g. Assume that m and n are used
later, so they are exposed values. t2 is also exposed; it must be preserved for
its use in the computation of t3.

The fact that t2 is exposed affects the code in two distinct ways. First, the
compiler cannot rewrite (a + b + c + d) as (a + b) + (c + d) because the latter
expression never computes the value of t2. Second, the computation of t2
must precede the computation of t3, which, again, restricts the order of op-
erations.

The algorithm to find candidate trees must treat each exposed value as the
root of a tree. In the example, this produces the forest shown in the margin.
Notice that t2 is defined once and used twice. The trees for t2 and m are too
small to benefit from tree-height balancing, while the tree for n, with four
operands, can be balanced.

If the compiler’s definitive IR is not a collection of expression trees, it can
Upward exposed
A name x is upward exposed in block b
if the first use of x in b refers to a value
computed before entering b.

either build the expression trees for the block as a derivative IR, or it can
interpret the definitive IR as expression trees to drive the algorithm. The
latter approach requires some simple data structures to link each use in the
block with either the definition in the block that reaches it or a notation to
indicate that the use is upward exposed.



High-Level Sketch of the Algorithm

The tree-height balancing algorithm, shown in Fig. 8.7, consists of two
phases. The first phase finds the roots of the candidate expression trees in
the block. It ignores operators unless they are both commutative and asso-
ciative. If a value T is both an exposed value and the result of a commutative
and associative operator, then it adds T to a queue of roots, ordered by the
operator’s arithmetic precedence.

The second phase takes the roots, in precedence order from lowest to high-
est, and creates a balanced tree by flattening the tree into a single n-ary
operator and then rebuilding it in balanced form. The n-ary tree for n in our
continuing example appears in the margin.

Phase 1: Finding Candidate Trees

Phase 1 of the algorithm is straightforward. The algorithm walks over the
operations in the block, in order, and tests each operation to see if it should
be the root of a candidate tree. The test relies on observations made ear-
lier. A candidate tree root must be the result of using a commutative and
associative operator to create an exposed value.

To determine if the value Ti defined by operation i is exposed, the compiler
must understand where Ti is used. The compiler can compute LIVEOUT sets
for each block and use that information to determine if Ti is used after the
current block (see Section 8.6.1). As part of computing the initial informa-
tion for that computation, the compiler can also determine how many times
Ti is used within the block.

The test for a candidate-tree root, then, can be expressed concisely. For an
operation T ← L Op R in block B, T is a root if and only if:

Op is both commutative and associative and

( T is used more than once in B or T ∈ LIVEOUT(B))

Phase 1 initializes the ranks of each Ti defined in the block. For each root
that it finds, it marks the name as a root and adds it to a priority queue of
the roots. The queue for the continuing example appears in the margin; it

(⟨t2,1⟩, ⟨m,1⟩,⟨n,2⟩ )

Queue of Roots for Example
assumes precedence of one for + and two for ×.

Phase 2: Rebuilding the Block in Balanced Form

Phase 2 takes the queue of candidate-tree roots and builds, from each root,
an approximately balanced tree. Phase 2 starts with a while loop that calls
Balance on each candidate tree root. Balance, Flatten, and Rebuild implement
Phase 2, as shown in Figs. 8.8 and 8.9.



Balance(root)
// Create balanced tree from its root, Ti
if Rank(root) ≥ 0 then

return
// already processed this tree

q ← new empty queue
// Flatten the tree, then rebuild it

Rank(root) ← Flatten(Li ,q ) + Flatten(Ri ,q )

Rebuild(root, q , Opi )

Flatten(node,q)
// Flatten computes a rank for node & builds the queue

if node is a constant then
// Constant is a leaf in the tree

Rank(node) ← 0

Enqueue(q,node,Rank(node))

else if node is upward exposed then
// UE is a leaf in the tree

Rank(node) ← 1

Enqueue(q,node,Rank(node))

else if node is a root
// Root of another tree is a leaf

Balance(node)
// Balance sets Rank(node)

Enqueue(q,node,Rank(node))

else
// interior node for Ti ← Li Opi Ri
Rank(node) ← Flatten(Lj ,q ) + Flatten(Rj ,q )

return Rank(node)

■ FIGURE 8.8 Tree-Height Balancing Algorithm: Balance and Flatten.

Balance is invoked on each candidate-tree root in increasing priority order. If
the tree has not already been balanced, Balance calls Flatten to create a new
priority queue that holds all the operands of the current tree. In essence, the
queue represents the single-level, n-ary version of the candidate tree. Once
Flatten has created the queue, Balance invokes Rebuild to emit code for the
approximately balanced tree.

Flatten is straightforward. It recursively walks the candidate tree, assigns
Recall that Phase 1 ranked the Roots queue
by arithmetic precedence, which forces Flat-
ten to follow the correct evaluation order.
each node a rank, and adds it to the queue. Flatten assigns ranks directly to
leaf nodes: zero for a constant and one for a leaf. If Flatten encounters a root,
it calls Balance on that root; Balance creates a new queue, flattens the root’s
candidate tree, and rebuilds it. The root keeps the priority assigned to it by
that recursive call.

When Balance calls Rebuild, the queue contains all of the leaves from the
candidate tree, in rank order. Intermediate results, represented by interior
nodes in the original expression trees are gone.

Rebuild uses a simple algorithm to rewrite the code. It repeatedly removes the
Balance, in effect, gathers the constants
together so that Rebuild can combine them.
two lowest-ranked items from the tree. If they are constant, then it evaluates



Rebuild(root, q, op)
// Build a balanced expression

while (q is not empty) do

NewL ← Dequeue(q)
// Get a left operand

NewR ← Dequeue(q)
// Get a right operand

if NewL and NewR are both constants then

// evaluate and fold the result

NewT ← Fold(op, NewL, NewR)

if q is empty then

create the op "root ← NewT"

Rank(root) = 0

else

Enqueue(q, NewT, 0)

Rank(NewT) = 0

else if q is empty then
// not a constant; name the result

NewT ← root

else

NewT ← new name

create the op "NewT ← NewL op NewR"

Rank(NewT) ← Rank(NewL) + Rank(NewR)

if q is not empty then// More ops in q ⇒ add NewT to q

Enqueue(q, NewT, Rank(NewT))

■ FIGURE 8.9 Tree-Height Balancing Algorithm: Rebuild.

the operation and pushes the result back onto the queue with priority zero.
Since all constants have rank zero, Rebuild will fold them all into a single
constant term. If one or more of the items has nonzero rank, Rebuild creates
an operation to combine the two items. It assigns the operation a new rank.
Finally, it pushes the new operation onto the queue. This process continues
until the queue is empty.

The expression trees and Roots queue that Phase 1 produces for the ongoing
example are shown in the margin. Phase 2 pulls each root from the queue
and passes it to Balance. Neither m nor t2 have enough operands for the
algorithm to create a balanced tree.

When Phase 2 pulls n from the Roots queue, Flatten builds a queue that holds
all four operands, each with rank one. Rebuild then creates operations to
compute g × f and t2 × e, enters those operations into the queue with rank
two, and then pulls them and combines them into the root, n. The rebuilt
tree for n appears in the margin.



■ FIGURE 8.10 Detailed Example of Tree-Height Balancing.

A Larger Example

Fig. 8.10(a) shows a second example. Constants have been folded and re-
dundant computations eliminated, as LVN might do. All of s, t, u, v, w, x, y,
and z are upward exposed; t6, t10, and t11 are live on exit from the block.

The block contains several intertwined computations. Panel (b) shows the
five distinct expression trees in the block. The values of t3 and t7 are each
used multiple times, so we show them as distinct trees. The connections to
t3 and t7 are shown in gray.

When we apply Phase 1 of the tree-height balancing algorithm to the exam-
ple, it finds five roots: the three values that are live on exit, plus t3 and t7.
The roots appear in boxes in panels (b) and (c). At the end of Phase 1, Roots
contains: { ⟨t11,1⟩, ⟨t7,1⟩, ⟨t3,1⟩, ⟨t10,2⟩, ⟨t6,2⟩ }.

Phase 2 of the algorithm starts with the Roots queue. It removes a node from
the Roots queue and calls Balance to process it. When Balance returns, it
repeats the process until the Roots queue is empty.

Applying the Phase 2 algorithm to our example’s Roots queue, it first calls
Balance on t11. Balance calls Flatten, which builds a queue. When Flatten
encounters t3, which is a root, it invokes Balance(t3).

When Balance is applied to t3, it first calls Flatten, which produces the queue:
{⟨4,0⟩,⟨13,0⟩,⟨t,1⟩,⟨s,1⟩}. Balance passes this queue to Rebuild.

Rebuild dequeues ⟨4,0⟩ and ⟨13,0⟩. Since both are constants, it adds them and
enqueues ⟨17,0⟩. Next, it dequeues ⟨17,0⟩ and ⟨t,1⟩; creates the operation



17 + t; assigns the result to a new name, say n0; and enqueues ⟨n0,1⟩. Finally,
n0 ← 17 + t

t3 ← n0 + s
Rebuild dequeues ⟨n0,1⟩ and ⟨s,1⟩ and creates the operation n0 + s. Since the
queue is now empty, Rebuild assigns the result to the tree’s root, t3. The code
is shown in the margin.

Rebuild returns; Balance returns; and control is back in the call to Flatten on

t11. Flatten continues, until it hits t7, and recurs on Balance(t7).

For t7, Flatten produces the queue: {⟨x,1⟩,⟨w,1⟩}. Rebuild dequeues ⟨x,1⟩ and
⟨w,1⟩; creates the operation x + w; and, since the queue is empty, assigns the
t7 ← x + w
result to the root, t7, as shown in the margin.

Rebuild returns; Balance returns; and control returns to Flatten(t11 ). Flatten
returns the queue: {⟨z,1⟩,⟨y,1⟩,⟨t7,2⟩⟨t3,2⟩}. Rebuild creates the operation
n1
← z + y

n2
← n1 + t7
t11 ← n2 + t3
z + y and assigns its value to n1. Next, it creates the operation n1 + t7 and
assigns its value to n2. Finally, it creates the operation n2 + t3 and assigns its
value to the tree’s root, t11.

Rebuild returns; Balance returns; and control flows back to the while loop.
Phase 2 calls Balance(t7), which finds that t7 has been processed. It then
calls Balance(t3), which finds that t3 has been processed.

Next, the while loop invokes Balance(t10). Flatten recurs on Balance for both

t3 and t7. In both cases, the tree has already been processed. At that point,

Flatten returns the queue: {⟨t7,2⟩, ⟨t3,2⟩}. Rebuild creates the operation t7 × t3
t10 ← t7 × t3
and, since the queue is now empty, assigns it to the tree’s root, t10. Rebuild
returns. Balance returns.

The next, and final, iteration of the while loop invokes Balance(t6). Flat-

ten encounters t3, which causes it to recur with Balance(t3); since t3 has
been processed, the call returns immediately. Flatten returns the queue:
{⟨3,0⟩,⟨v,1⟩,⟨u,1⟩,⟨t3,2⟩}. From this queue, Rebuild creates the operations
n3 ← 3 × v

n4 ← n3 × u

t6 ← n4 × t3
shown in the margin. Rebuild returns; Balance returns; and the while loop
terminates. Fig. 8.11 shows the final result.

The difference between the forests of expression trees in Figs. 8.10(b)
and 8.11.b may not be obvious. To appreciate the restructured tree, com-
pare the height of the tree for t6, including the tree for t3. In the original
code, the tree has height seven where the restructured tree has height four.
Similarly, the original tree for t11 has height five where the restructured tree
has height four.

As a final point, the reader may observe that the individual trees in
Fig. 8.11(b) do not look balanced. The algorithm creates balance across the
entire block, rather than across the individual trees. This effect is a simple



■ FIGURE 8.11 Code Structure After Balancing.

and clear example of the difference between optimizing for a local effect
and optimizing over a larger context.

The balance across the block is the result of a single line of code in Flatten
from Fig. 8.8. For a root x, Flatten enqueues x with the rank it was previously
assigned in Balance. If we modified that line of code to enqueue it with a
rank of one, each of the subtrees would be balanced. The drawing might
look better, but the overall height of trees that reference shared subtrees
would be taller and the code would expose less ILP.

SECTION REVIEW
Local optimization operates on the code for a single basic block. These
techniques rewrite the block based on information derived from that block.
In the process, they must maintain the block’s interactions with the
surrounding execution context. In particular, they must preserve any
observable values computed in the block.

Because they limit their scope to a single block, local optimizations can rely
on properties that only hold true in straight-line code. For example, local
value numbering relies on the fact that all the operations in the block
execute in an order that is consistent with straight-line execution. Thus, it
can build a model of prior context that exposes redundancies and
constant-valued expressions. Similarly, tree-height balancing relies on the
fact that a block has just one entry and one exit to determine which
subexpressions in the block it must preserve and which ones it can reorder.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Naming plays a key role in the effectiveness of LVN. Sketch an algo-
rithm to rename the values in a basic block so that each definition in
the block creates a unique name and that each use refers to the correct
new name.

2.
The tree-height balancing algorithm ranks a node n in the final expres-
sion tree with the number of nonconstant leaves below it in the final
tree. How would you modify the algorithm to produce ranks that corre-
spond to the height of n in the tree? Would that change the code that
the algorithm produces?

8.5 REGIONAL OPTIMIZATION

Inefficiencies are not limited to single blocks. Code in one block may pro-
vide the context for improving code in another block. Thus, many optimiza-
tions examine contexts larger than a single block.

Regional techniques operate over subsets of the control-flow graph that in-
clude multiple blocks but do not, typically, extend to the entire procedure.
The primary complication that arises in the shift from local optimization to
these regional methods is the need to handle multiple control-flow paths.
An if–then–else construct introduces conditionally executed paths. Loops
introduce cyclic control flow. Because regional methods examine more con-
text than local methods, they can discover opportunites that local methods
cannot see. Because they focus on a subset of the procedure’s CFG, these
methods can often be simpler than a global approach to the same problem.

This section presents two regional techniques as illustrations. The first, su-
perlocal value numbering, extends LVN to multiple blocks. The second,
loop unrolling, operates over a single loop nest; unrolling played a role in
the discussion of dmxpy in Section 8.2.1.

8.5.1 Superlocal Value Numbering

To improve the results of LVN, the compiler can expand its scope from a
single basic block to an extended basic block, or EBB (see Section 8.3).
To process an EBB, the algorithm should value number each path through
the EBB. Consider, for example, the CFG shown in Fig. 8.12(a). It contains
three EBBs. The nontrivial EBB is (B0, B1, B3, B4, B6). The other two EBBs
are trivial: (B2) and (B5). The regional version of value numbering, which
we call superlocal value numbering (SVN), processes one EBB at a time
and propagates information down each path in the EBB.



■ FIGURE 8.12 Example for Superlocal Value Numbering.

The nontrivial EBB contains three paths: ⟨B0, B1⟩, ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩, and
⟨B0, B3, B6⟩. SVN treats each of these paths as if it were straight-line code.
To process ⟨B0, B1⟩, the compiler can apply LVN to B0 and use the resulting
hash table as a starting point when it applies LVN to B1. The same approach
can handle ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩ and ⟨B0, B3, B6⟩ by processing the blocks for each
in order and carrying the hash tables forward. Blocks that have multiple
predecessors, such as B2 and B5, start new EBBs and, therefore, inherit no
context from their predecessors.

This scheme achieves the results of LVN over longer paths by treating each
EBB path as if it were a single block. To make the example concrete, con-
sider the code for each block shown in Fig. 8.12(b). Applying LVN to EBB
paths exposes opportunities that are hidden when considering just the indi-
vidual blocks.

■
In ⟨B0, B1⟩, LVN discovers that the assignments to n0 and r0 are redun-
dant. SVN discovers the same redundancies.

■
In ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩, LVN finds that the assignment to n0 is redundant. SVN
also finds that the assignments to q0 and s0 are redundant.

■
In ⟨B0, B3, B6⟩, LVN finds that the assignment to n0 is redundant. SVN
also finds that the assignments to q0 and t0 are redundant.

■
In B5 and B2, SVN degenerates to LVN.

The difficulty in this approach lies in making the process efficient. The obvi-
ous approach would treat each path as if it were a single block, pretending,



// Start the process

WorkList ← { entry block }

Empty ← new table for Block

while (WorkList is not empty) do

remove Block from WorkList

SVN(Block, Empty)

free Empty

// Superlocal value numbering algorithm

SVN(Block, Table)

t ← new table for Block

link Table as the surrounding scope for t

LVN(Block, t)

for each successor s of Block do

if |preds(s)| = 1 then

SVN(s, t)

else if s has not been processed then

add s to WorkList

free t

■ FIGURE 8.13 Superlocal Value Numbering Algorithm.

for example, that the code for ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩ looks like the code shown in mar-
m0 ← a0 + b0
n0 ← a0 + b0
q0 ← a0 + b0
r1 ← c0 + d0
e0 ← b0 + 18

s0 ← a0 + b0
u0 ← e0 + f0

Treating a Path as a Single Block

gin. Unfortunately, this approach analyzes a block once for each path that
includes it. In the extended block (B0, B1 B3 B4, B6), the algorithm would
analyze B0 three times and B3 twice. While we want the optimization bene-
fits that come from examining increased context, we also want to minimize
compile-time costs. The key to achieving these conflicting goals is to capi-
talize on the tree structure of the EBB.

To make SVN efficient, the compiler must reuse the results of blocks
that occur as prefixes on multiple paths through the EBB. After process-
ing ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩, it needs a mechanism to recreate the state for the end of
⟨B0, B3⟩ so that it can reuse that state to process B6. The compiler can ac-
complish this effect in several ways:

■
It can record the state of the table at each block boundary and restore
that state when needed.

■
It can unwind the effects of a block by walking the block backward and,
at each operation, undoing the work of the forward pass.

■
It can use a sheaf of linked hash tables to implement the value table (see
Section 4.5.1). As it enters a block, it creates a new table. To retract the
block’s effects, it deletes that block’s table.

While all three schemes will work, the sheaf of tables can produce a simple
SVN can easily estimate the size of each
table from the block sizes.
and fast implementation, particularly if the compiler writer can reuse a table
implementation from the compiler’s front end.

Fig. 8.13 shows a high-level sketch of the SVN algorithm, using a sheaf
of value tables. It assumes that the LVN algorithm has been parameterized
to accept a block and a sheaf of tables. At each block b, SVN allocates a
value table for b, links it to the value table of the predecessor block as if



it were a surrounding scope, and invokes LVN on block b with this new
table. When LVN returns, SVN must decide how to process each of b’s
successors.

For a successor s of b, two cases arise. If s has only one predecessor, b,
then SVN should use the accumulated context from b. Thus, SVN recurs
on s with the table from b. If s has multiple predecessors, then SVN must
start s with a new context, so SVN adds s to the WorkList. The outer loop
will find it later and invoke SVN on s with an empty table. It is important
to implement Worklist as a set to ensure that each block is processed exactly
once (see Section B.2).

One complication remains. A name’s value number is recorded in the value
table associated with the first operation in the EBB that defines it. This effect
can defeat our use of the scoping mechanism. In our example CFG, if a name
x were defined in each of B0, B4, and B6, its value number would be recorded
in the scoped table for B0. When SVN processed B4, it would record x’s new
value number from B4 in the table for B0. When SVN deleted the table for
B4 and created a new table for B6, the value number from the definition in
B4 would remain.

To avoid this complication, the compiler can run SVN on a representation
that defines each name once. As we saw in Section 4.6.2, SSA form has the
requisite property; each name is defined at exactly one point in the code.
Using SSA form ensures that SVN records the value number for a definition
in the table that corresponds to the block that contains the definition. With

SSA form, SVN can undo all of a block’s effects by deleting its value table.
This action reverts the set of tables to their state on exit from the block’s

CFG predecessor. As discussed in Section 8.4.1, using SSA form can also
make LVN more effective.

Applying the algorithm from Fig. 8.13 to the code shown in Fig. 8.12 pro-

1. Create scope for B0

2. Apply LVN to B0

3. Create scope for B1

4. Apply LVN to B1

5. Add B2 to WorkList

6. Delete B1’s scope

7. Create scope for B3

8. Apply LVN to B3

9. Create scope for B4

10. Apply LVN to B4

11. Add B5 to WorkList

12. Delete B4’s scope

13. Create scope for B6

14. Apply LVN to B6

15. Delete B6’s scope

16. Delete B3’s scope

17. Delete B0’s scope

18. Create scope for B5

19. Apply LVN to B5

20. Delete B5’s scope

21. Create scope for B2

22. Apply LVN to B2

23. Delete B2’s scope

Actions Taken by SVN
on the Example

duces the sequence of actions shown in the margin. The algorithm begins
with B0 and proceeds down to B1. At the end of B1, it visits B2, realizes that
B2 has multiple predecessors, and adds it to the worklist. Next, it backs up
and processes B3 and then B4. At the end of B4, it adds B5 to the worklist.
It then backs up to B3 and processes B6. At that point, control returns to
the while loop, which invokes SVN on the two singleton blocks from the
worklist, B5 and B2.

SVN discovers and removes redundant computations that LVN cannot. In
the example, it finds that the assignments to q0, s0, and t0 are redundant
because of definitions in earlier blocks. LVN, with its purely local scope,
cannot find these redundancies.



do 60 j = 1, n2
nextra = mod(n1,4)
if (nextra .ge. 1) then
do 49 i = 1, nextra
y(i) = y(i) + x(j) * m(i,j)
49
continue

do 50 i = nextra + 1, n1, 4
y(i)
= y(i)
+ x(j) * m(i,j)
y(i+1) = y(i+1) + x(j) * m(i+1,j)
y(i+2) = y(i+2) + x(j) * m(i+2,j)
y(i+3) = y(i+3) + x(j) * m(i+3,j)
50
continue
60
continue

nextra = mod(n2,4)
if (nextra .ge. 1) then
do 59 j = 1, nextra
do 49 i = 1, n1
y(i) = y(i) + x(j) * m(i,j)
49
continue
59
continue

do 60 j = nextra+1, n2, 4
do 50 i = 1, n1
y(i) = y(i) + x(j)
* m(i,j)
y(i) = y(i) + x(j+1) * m(i,j+1)
y(i) = y(i) + x(j+2) * m(i,j+2)
y(i) = y(i) + x(j+3) * m(i,j+3)
50
continue
60
continue

(a) Unroll Inner Loop by Four
(b) Unroll Outer Loop by Four, Fuse Inner Loops

■ FIGURE 8.14 Unrolling dmxpy’s Loop Nest.

On the other hand, SVN has its own limitations. It fails to find redundancies
in B5 and B2. The reader can tell, by inspection, that the assignments in
those blocks are redundant. Because the blocks have multiple predecessors,

SVN cannot carry context into them. Thus, it misses those opportunities. An
algorithm would need more context to discover them.

8.5.2 Loop Unrolling

Loop unrolling is, perhaps, the oldest, simplest, and best-known loop trans-
formation. To unroll a loop, the compiler replicates the loop’s body and
adjusts the logic that controls the number of iterations performed. To see
this, consider the loop nest from dmxpy used as an example in Section 8.2.

do 60 j = 1, n2
do 50 i = 1, n1
y(i) = y(i) + x(j) * m(i,j)
50
continue
60 continue

The compiler can unroll either the inner loop or the outer loop. The result of
Loop fusion
The process of combining two loop bodies
into one is called fusion.

Fusion is safe when each definition and
each use in the resulting loop has the same
value that it did in the original loops.

unrolling the inner loop by four is shown in Fig. 8.14(a). Unrolling the outer
loop by four produces four inner loops; if the compiler then combines those
inner-loop bodies—a transformation called loop fusion—it will produce
code similar to that shown in Fig. 8.14(b). The combination of outer-loop
unrolling followed by inner-loop fusion is often called unroll-and-jam.



In each case, the transformed code needs a short prolog loop to peel off
enough iterations so that the unrolled loop processes an integral multiple of
four iterations. If the loop bounds are known at compile time, the compiler
can determine if the prolog is necessary.

Inner-loop unrolling and outer-loop unrolling produce different results for
this particular loop nest. Inner-loop unrolling reduces the number of test-
and-branch sequences that the inner loop executes. By contrast, outer-loop
unrolling followed by inner-loop fusion not only reduces the number of test-
and-branch sequences, but also produces reuse of y(i) and sequential access
to both x and m. The increased reuse fundamentally changes the ratio of
Access to m is sequential because FOR-
TRAN stores arrays in column-major order.
arithmetic operations to memory operations in the loop; undoubtedly, the
author of dmxpy had that effect in mind when he hand-optimized the code,
as shown in Fig. 8.1. As discussed below, each approach may also accrue
indirect benefits.

Sources of Improvement and Degradation

Loop unrolling has both direct and indirect effects on the code that the
compiler can produce for a given loop. The final performance of the loop
depends on all of the effects, direct and indirect.

In terms of direct benefits, unrolling should reduce the number of operations
required to complete the loop. The control-flow changes reduce the total
number of test-and-branch sequences. Unrolling can create reuse within the
loop body, reducing memory traffic. Finally, if the loop contains a cyclic
chain of copy operations, unrolling can eliminate the copies as shown in
Exercise 8.6.

Unrolling a loop can, however, increase the code size, both in the IR form
and in the final form as executable code. Growth in IR increases compile
time; growth in executable code has little effect until the loop overflows the
instruction cache—at which time the degradation probably overwhelms any
direct benefits.

The compiler can also unroll for indirect effects. A key side effect of un-
rolling is to increase the number of operations in the loop body. Other
optimizations can capitalize on this change in several ways:

■
Increasing the amount of ILP in the loop body can lead to better instruc-
tion schedules. With more independent operations, the scheduler has a
better chance of keeping multiple functional units busy and of hiding
the latency of multicycle operations such as branches and memory ac-
cesses.



■
Unrolling can move consecutive memory accesses into the same itera-
tion, where the compiler can schedule them together. That may improve
locality or allow the use of multiword operations.

■
Unrolling can expose cross-iteration redundancies that are harder to dis-
cover in the original code. Both versions of the code in Fig. 8.14 reuse
address expressions across iterations of the original loop. In the unrolled
loops, local value numbering would find and eliminate those redundan-
cies. In the original, it would miss them.

■
The unrolled loop may optimize differently than the original loop. For
example, increasing the number of appearances of a variable in a loop
can change the weights used in spill code selection within the register
allocator (see Section 13.4). Changing the pattern of register spills can
radically affect the running time of the loop.

Note, however, that the unrolled loop body may need more registers than
the original loop body. If the increased demand for registers induces ad-
ditional register spills and restores, then the resulting memory traffic may
overwhelm the potential benefits of unrolling.

These indirect interactions are much harder to characterize and understand
than the direct effects. They can produce significant performance improve-
ments. They can also produce performance degradations. The difficulty of
predicting such indirect effects has led some researchers to advocate an
adaptive approach to choosing unroll factors; in such systems, the compiler
tries several unroll factors and measures the performance characteristics of
the resulting code.

SECTION REVIEW
Optimizations that focus on regions larger than a block and smaller than an
entire procedure can find and capitalize on opportunities that a purely local
algorithm cannot. These regional techniques have a long history in the
literature and in practice.

In some cases, such as SVN, the extension to a regional scope provides
increased optimization for little additional cost. Both SVN and superlocal
instruction scheduling (see Section 12.4.1) have efficient implementations.

In other cases, regional optimizations apply more aggressive techniques to
small regions in the code where the payoff may be large. Loop
optimizations fit this mold. Many loop optimizations require extensive
analysis to prove safety. Because so many programs spend a large part of
their execution time inside loops, compiler writers have found these
techniques to be profitable.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Superlocal value numbering extends local value numbering to ex-
tended basic blocks through clever use of a scoped hash table. Con-
sider the issues that might arise in extending the tree-height balancing
algorithm to a superlocal scope.

a.
How would your algorithm handle a single path through an EBB,
such as ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩ in the control-flow graph shown in the margin?

b.
What complications arise when the algorithm tries to process
⟨B0, B3, B6⟩ after processing ⟨B0, B3, B4⟩?

2.
Loop unrolling always decreases loop overhead. Despite this fact, com-
pilers do not unroll every loop. What factors should the compiler con-
sider in deciding whether or not to unroll a given loop?

8.6 GLOBAL OPTIMIZATION

Global optimizations operate on an entire procedure or method. Because
their scope includes cyclic control-flow constructs such as loops, these
methods typically complete an analysis phase before they rewrite the code.

This section presents two examples of global analysis and optimization. The
first, finding uninitialized variables with live information, is not strictly an
optimization. Rather, it uses global data-flow analysis to discover useful in-
formation about the flow of values in a procedure. We will use the discussion
to introduce the notion of liveness, which plays a role in many optimization
techniques, including tree-height balancing (Section 8.4.2), the construction
of SSA form (Section 9.3), and register allocation (Chapter 13). The second,
global code placement, uses profile information gathered from running the
compiled code to rearrange the layout of the executable code.

8.6.1 Finding Uninitialized Variables with Live Sets

If a procedure can use some variable v before v has been assigned a value,
we say that v is potentially uninitialized at that use. Use of an uninitial-
ized variable almost always indicates a logical error in the procedure being
compiled. If the compiler discovers such situations, it should alert the pro-
grammer to their existence.

We can find potential uses of uninitialized variables by computing informa-
Live variable
A variable v is live at point p if there exists
a path from p to a use of v along which v is
not redefined.

tion about liveness. A variable v is live at point p if and only if there exists
a path in the CFG from p to a use of v along which v is not redefined. We



encode live information by computing, for each block b in the procedure, a
set LIVEOUT(b) that contains all the variables that are live on exit from b.

Conceptually, the compiler can find uninitialized variables by adding an ar-
tificial entry node, n0, to the CFG and an edge from n0 to each actual entry
node in the CFG. Then, LIVEOUT(n0) contains precisely those variables that
can be used before they are defined.

In practice, since n0 would have no effect on the sets of the other nodes in
the CFG, the compiler need not represent n0. It can solve for LIVEOUT ignor-
ing n0. After that computation, it can calculate the value that LIVEOUT(n0)
would have, if n0 existed. This approach should be marginally faster, since
it avoids iterative evaluations of LIVEOUT(n0).

The computation of LIVEOUT sets is an example of global data-flow anal-
Data-flow analysis
a form of compile-time analysis for reason-
ing about the flow of values at runtime
ysis, a family of techniques for reasoning, at compile time, about the flow
of values at runtime. Problems in data-flow analysis are typically posed as a
set of simultaneous equations over sets associated with the nodes and edges
of a graph.

Defining the Data-Flow Problem

Live variable analysis is a classic problem in global data-flow analysis.
The compiler computes, for each node n in the procedure’s CFG, a set
LIVEOUT(n) that contains all the variables that are live on exit from the
block corresponding to n.

Data-flow problems are often defined by an equation over sets associated
with the nodes of the CFG. For live variables, the following equation defines
the LIVEOUT set for a node n:

LIVEOUT(n) =
�

m∈succ(n)

�
UEVAR(m) ∪

(LIVEOUT(m) ∩ VARKILL(m))

�

where succ(n) refers to the set of CFG successors of n. The analysis should
initialize LIVEOUT(n) = ∅, ∀n.

Here, UEVAR(m) contains the upward-exposed variables in m—variables
that are used in m before being defined in m. VARKILL(m) contains any
variables defined in m; the overline on VARKILL(m) indicates its logical
complement, the set of all variables not defined in m. The compiler must
compute both UEVAR and VARKILL sets for each node in the CFG before it
can solve the equations for LIVEOUT.

The equation encodes the definition of liveness in an intuitive way.
LIVEOUT(n) is just the union of those variables that are live at the head



// each block has k operations

// of the form “x ← y op z”

for each block b do

// Initialize the sets for b

UEVAR(b) ← ∅

VARKILL(b) ← ∅

for i ← 1 to k do

if y /∈ VARKILL(b) then

add y to UEVAR(b)

if z /∈ VARKILL(b) then

add z to UEVAR(b)

add x to VARKILL(b)

// assume the CFG has N blocks

// numbered 0 to N - 1

for i ← 0 to N - 1 do

LIVEOUT( i ) ← ∅

changed ← true

while (changed) do

changed ← false

for i ← 0 to N - 1 do

recompute LIVEOUT( i )

if LIVEOUT( i ) changed then

changed ← true

(a) Gathering Initial Information
(b) Solving the Equations

■ FIGURE 8.15 Iterative Live Analysis.

of some block m that immediately follows n in the CFG. The definition
requires that a value be live on some path, not on all paths. Thus, the contri-
butions of the successors of n in the CFG are combined to form LIVEOUT(n).
The contribution of a specific successor m of n is:

UEVAR(m) ∪ (LIVEOUT(m) ∩ VARKILL(m))

A variable, v, is live on entry to m under one of two conditions. It can
be used in m before it is defined in m: v ∈ UEVAR(m). It can be live on
exit from m and pass unscathed through m because m does not redefine
it: v ∈ LIVEOUT(m) ∩ VARKILL(m). Combining these two terms gives the
contribution of m to LIVEOUT(n). To compute LIVEOUT(n), the analyzer
computes the contribution of each of n’s successors, denoted m ∈ succ(n),
and combines them with a union operation.

Solving the Data-Flow Problem

To compute the LIVEOUT sets for a procedure and its CFG, the compiler can
use a three-step algorithm.

1. Build a CFG The compiler steps through the blocks and builds the graph
(see Section 4.4.4). Each node represents a block.
2. Gather Initial Information
For each block b, the compiler computes
UEVAR(b) and VARKILL(b), as shown in Fig. 8.15(a).
3. Solve the Equations for LIVEOUT(b)
Fig. 8.15(b) shows a simple itera-
tive fixed-point algorithm that will solve the equations.



■ FIGURE 8.16 Example LIVEOUT Computation.

The rest of this section works through an example LIVEOUT computation.
Section 9.2 explores iterative data-flow analysis in more depth.

Gathering Initial Information

To compute LIVEOUT, the analyzer needs UEVAR and VARKILL sets for
each block. A single pass can compute both. For each block, the analyzer
initializes these sets to ∅. Next, it walks the block, in order from top to
bottom, and updates both UEVAR and VARKILL to reflect the impact of each
operation. Fig. 8.15(a) shows the details of this computation for operations
of the form x ← y ⟨op⟩ z.

Consider the CFG shown in the margin. It consists of a simple loop that
contains an if-then construct. The code abstracts away the details of the
compares and branches. The table below the CFG shows the initial UEVAR
and VARKILL sets.

Solving the LIVEOUT Equations

Given UEVAR and VARKILL sets for each node in the CFG, the compiler
applies the algorithm from Fig. 8.15(b) to compute LIVEOUT sets for each
node. It initializes all of the LIVEOUT sets to ∅. Next, it computes the
LIVEOUT set for each block, in order. It repeats the process, computing
LIVEOUT for each node in order until the LIVEOUT sets no longer change.

The table in Fig. 8.16 shows the values of the LIVEOUT sets at each iteration
of the solver. Iteration zero shows the initial values. Iteration one com-
putes an initial approximation to the LIVEOUT sets. Because it processes the
blocks in ascending order of their labels, B0, B1, and B2 receive values based
solely on the UEVAR sets of their CFG successors. When the algorithm
reaches B3, it has already computed an approximation for LIVEOUT(B1), so
the value that it computes for B3 reflects the contribution of the new value
for LIVEOUT(B1). LIVEOUT(B4) is empty, as befits the exit block.

In the second iteration, the value s is added to LIVEOUT(B0) as a con-
sequence of its presence in the approximation of LIVEOUT(B1). No other



changes occur. The third iteration does not change the values of the
LIVEOUT sets and the algorithm halts.

The order in which the algorithm processes the blocks affects the values
The theory of iterative data-flow analysis
guarantees that the solution to this set of
equations is unique (see also Section 9.2).
of the intermediate sets. If the algorithm visited the blocks in descending
order of their labels, it would require one fewer pass. However, the final
values of the LIVEOUT sets are independent of the evaluation order. The
iterative solver in Fig. 8.15 computes a fixed-point solution to the equations
for LIVEOUT.

This iterative data-flow solver is a fixed-point algorithm. It halts because
(1) the LIVEOUT sets are finite and (2) the recomputation of LIVEOUT for
a block can either produce the same set or a larger set. The VARKILL and
UEVAR sets are constant across all the iterations. The LIVEOUT sets increase
monotonically; since their size is bounded, the algorithm must halt.

Finding Uninitialized Variables

Once the compiler has computed LIVEOUT sets for each node in the CFG, it
must compute the set of variables that are live on entry to any of the CFG’s
entry nodes. This set is equivalent to LIVEOUT(n0), if n0 were an artificial
entry node with an edge to each actual entry node.

The example CFG has just one entry node, B0, so LIVEOUT(n0) is:

UEVAR(B0) ∪ (LIVEOUT(B0) ∩ VARKILL(B0)) = { s }

Inspection shows that s is uninitialized along the path ⟨B0, B1, B3⟩.

This approach identifies variables that have a potentially uninitialized use.
The compiler should recognize that situation and report it to the program-
mer. However, this approach may yield false positives for several reasons.

■
If a variable v is ambiguous, it could be initialized through another name.
...
p = &x;

*p = 0;
...
x = x + 1;

Live analysis will not connect the initialization and the use. This situa-
tion can arise when a pointer is set to the address of a local variable, as
in the code fragment shown in the margin.

■
If a variable v exists before the current procedure is invoked, then it may
have been previously initialized in a manner invisible to the analyzer.
This case can arise with static variables of the current scope or with
variables declared outside the current scope.

■
The equations for live analysis may discover a path from the procedure’s

main() {
int s, i = 1;
while (i<=80) {
if (i==1)
s = 0;
s = s + i++;
}
printf("%d",s);
}

entry to a use of v along which v is not defined. If that path is not feasible
at runtime, then v will still appear in LIVEOUT(n0) even though no exe-
cution will ever use the uninitialized value. For example, the C program
in the margin always initializes s before its use, yet s ∈ LIVEOUT(n0).



The marginal example with the while loop illustrates one of the fundamental
limits of data-flow analysis: it assumes that all paths through the CFG are
feasible at runtime. In the example, that assumption is too conservative. The
only CFG path that leads to an uninitialized use runs from the entry of main
into the loop, bypasses the initialization of s, and executes the increment
of s. That path can never occur, because i must have the value 1 on the
loop’s first iteration. The LIVEOUT solver cannot discover that fact because
it has no mechanism to understand that the path is infeasible.

The assumption that all paths in the CFG are feasible greatly reduces the
cost of the analysis. At the same time, the assumption produces a loss of
precision in the computed sets. To discover that s is initialized on the first
iteration of the while loop, the compiler would need to combine an analysis
that tracked individual paths with some form of constant propagation and
with live analysis. To solve the problem in a general way would require
symbolic evaluation of parts of the code during the analysis, a much more
expensive prospect.

Another kind of complication arises at a procedure call. If a procedure con-
tains a call site, the analyzer must account for any side effects of that call.
At a call site s, some global variable v might be either used or modified
as the result of a call to s. (Similar issues arise if v is passed as a call-by-
reference parameter or if the callee is nested inside the caller.) In the absence
of specific information about the callee, the analyzer must assume that ev-
ery variable that might be modified is modified and that any variable that
might be used is used. Such assumptions are safe, in that they represent the
worst-case behavior.

Other Uses for Live Variables

Compilers use liveness in many other contexts.

■
The compiler can use live information to discover useless store oper-
ations. An operation that stores an unambiguous scalar variable v to
memory is useless unless v is live at the store. A useless store can be
deleted.

■
Live information can improve the speed and precision of the SSA con-
struction; a value only needs a φ-function in a block where it is live.
Eliminating nonlive φ-functions can significantly reduce the number of
φ-functions that the compiler inserts.

■
Live-variable information plays a critical role in global register alloca-
tion (see Section 13.4). The allocator need not preserve values in regions
where they are not live. Live information forms the basis for reasoning
about which values to keep in registers.



In different contexts, liveness is calculated for different sets of names. We
Live range
The live range of a value is the set of oper-
ations that lie between its definitions and its
uses.

have discussed LIVEOUT with an implicit domain of variable names. In
global register allocation, the compiler computes LIVEOUT sets over a care-
fully constructed set of values, called live ranges.

8.6.2 Global Code Placement

Many processors have asymmetric branch costs; the cost of the fall-through
path is less than the cost of the taken branch. Each branch has two successor
basic blocks; the compiler can choose which block lies on the fall-through
path and which lies on the taken path. The global code-placement optimiza-
tion relies, implicitly, on the twin observations that branches have asym-
metric costs and that some decisions in the code have lopsided execution
frequencies.

Consider the CFG shown in the margin. (B0, B3) executes 100 times more
often than (B0, B1). If branch costs are asymmetric, the compiler should use
the less expensive branch for (B0, B3). If (B0, B1) and (B0, B3) have roughly
equal execution frequencies, then that choice would have little impact for
this example.

Two different layouts for this code are shown in the margin. The “slow” lay-
out uses the fall-through branch to implement (B0, B1) and the taken branch
for (B0, B3). The “fast” layout reverses this decision. If the fall-through
branch is faster than the taken branch, then the “fast” layout uses the less
expensive branch 100 times more often.

The compiler can take advantage of asymmetric branch costs. If the com-
piler knows the expected relative execution frequencies of the branches in a
procedure, it can lay out the code for faster execution.

To perform global code placement, the compiler reorders the basic blocks
of a procedure according to two principles:

■
First, the compiler should make the most likely execution paths use fall-
through branches. Thus, whenever possible, a block should be followed
immediately by its most frequent successor.

This placement has two benefits. A larger portion of executed branches
take the faster (fall-through) path, directly reducing execution time.
Placing consecutive blocks in consecutive virtual memory addresses
should also improve instruction cache locality.

■
Second, the compiler should move infrequently executed code (cold
code) to the end of the procedure. This action places frequently exe-
cuted code (hot code) near other hot code and cold code away from the
hot code.



GATHERING PROFILE DATA
Profile data plays an important role in optimizations such as global code
placement or inline substitution (see Section 8.7.1). Several approaches are
used to gather profile data.

■
Instrumented Executables The compiler can generate code to count
specific events, such as procedure entries and exits or taken branches.
At the end of execution, the data is written to an external file and
processed offline by another tool.

■
Timer Interrupts The profile tool can interrupt program execution at
regular, frequent intervals. The tool constructs a histogram of program
counter locations where the interrupts occurred. Again, postprocessing
constructs a profile.

■
Performance Counters Most processors support hardware counters that
record specific events, such as taken branches. The runtime system can
use counters to construct accurate profile-like data.

Each approach produces slightly different data. An instrumented executable
can measure many different runtime properties. A timer-interrupt system
may have lower overhead, but only finds frequently executed statements
(not the paths taken to reach them). Hardware counters are accurate and
efficient, but depend in idiosyncratic ways on the specific processor.

Each of these approaches works. Each of them requires cooperation
between the compiler and the profiling tool on issues such as data formats,
code layout, and methods for mapping runtime locations back to locations
in the source code or the IR.

This placement can reduce the working-set size of the hot code, which
can, in turn, improve locality in cache and virtual memory.

After placement, the code should execute longer sequences of operations
without disruption—a taken branch, a stall due to an instruction cache fault,
or a stall due to a page fault.

Code placement, like most global optimizations, has separate analysis and
transformation phases. The analysis phase constructs branch execution fre-
quency estimates. The transformation phase uses that data, expressed as
weights on CFG edges, to discover the frequently executed paths. It then
reorders the basic blocks from that model.

Obtaining Profile Data

For global code placement, the compiler needs estimates of the relative ex-
ecution frequency of each edge in the CFG. It can obtain that information



E ← |edges|

for each block b do

create a degenerate chain, d, for b

priority(d) ← E

P ← 0

for each CFG edge ⟨x,y⟩, x ̸= y, in decreasing frequency order do

if x is the tail of chain a and y is the head of chain b then

t ← priority(a)

append b onto a

priority(a) ← min(t, priority(b), P++)

else priority(b) ← min(priority(b), P++)

■ FIGURE 8.17 Building Hot Paths.

from a profiling run of the code: compile the entire program, run it under
a profiling tool on representative data, and give the compiler access to the
resulting profile data. It can obtain that information from a model of pro-
gram execution; such models range from simple to elaborate, with a range
of accuracies.

Specifically, the compiler needs execution counts for the CFG edges. The

CFG in the margin illustrates why edge counts are superior to block counts
for code placement. From the execution counts, shown as labels on the
edges, we see that blocks B0 and B3 each execute ten times. The path
⟨B0, B1, B2, B3⟩ executes more than any other path in this CFG fragment.
The edge counts suggest, for example, that making B2 the fall-through case
of the branch at the end of B1 is better than making it the taken case.

Using execution counts for blocks rather than edges can be misleading; a
block’s count can combine counts from multiple paths. In the CFG, the
block counts for B2 and B4 would each be 5. For the branch at the end
of B1, those block counts suggest that the paths to B2 and B4 are of equal
importance, while the edge counts show that (B1, B2) executes more often
than (B1, B4). The code-placement algorithm ranks edges by frequency of
execution; thus, the increased accuracy from the edge counts has a direct
effect on the quality of the results.

Constructing Chains as Hot Paths in the CFG

To determine the code layout, the compiler finds hot paths through the

CFG—paths that contain the most frequently executed edges. Each path is a
chain of one or more blocks. The algorithm assigns a priority to each path;
the priorities drive the code reordering process.



■ FIGURE 8.18 Example of the Hot-Path Building Algorithm.

The compiler can use a greedy algorithm to find hot paths, as shown in
Fig. 8.17. To begin, it creates a degenerate chain for each block that contains
exactly that block. It sets the priority for each degenerate chain to a large
number, such as the number of edges in the CFG or the largest integer.

Next, the algorithm iterates over the edges in the CFG and builds up chains
to model the hot paths. It takes the edges in order of decreasing execution
frequency. For an edge, (x, y), the algorithm merges the chain containing x
The algorithm ignores self loops, (x, x),
because they do not affect placement deci-
sions.
with the chain containing y if and only if x is the last node in its chain and
y is the first node in its chain. If either condition is not true, it leaves the
chains that contain x and y alone.

If the algorithm merges the chains for x and y, it must assign the new chain
an appropriate priority. It computes that priority as the minimum of the pri-
orities of the chains for x and y. If both x and y are degenerate chains with
their initial high priority, the algorithm sets the priority of the new chain
to the ordinal number of merges that it has considered, denoted as P. The
effect of this choice is to place the new chain behind chains constructed
from higher-frequency edges and ahead of those constructed from lower-
frequency edges.

The algorithm halts after it examines every edge. It produces a set of chains
Forward branch
A forward branch is one whose target has
a higher address than its source. In some
ISAs, forward branches are faster than
backward branches.

that model the hot paths in the CFG. Each node belongs to exactly one chain.
Edges in chains execute more often than edges that cross from one chain to
another. The priority values of the chains approximate an order that would
maximize the number of executed forward branches.

To illustrate the algorithm’s operation, consider its behavior when applied to
the example CFG from the previous section, which appears in Fig. 8.18(a).



t ← chain headed by the CFG entry node

WorkList ← { (t, priority(t)) }

while (Worklist ̸= ∅) do

remove a chain c of lowest priority from WorkList

for each block x in c in chain order do

place x at the end of the executable code

for each block x in c do

for each edge ⟨x, y⟩ where y is unplaced do

t ← chain containing y

if (t, priority(t)) /∈ WorkList then

WorkList ← WorkList ∪ { (t, priority(t)) }

■ FIGURE 8.19 Code-Layout Algorithm.

Panel (b) shows the algorithm’s progress on the example. Priorities are
shown as subscripts on chains. E is |edges|.

Tie breaking among equal-priority chains can lead to different layouts. For
example, if the algorithm chooses (B4, B3) before (B2, B3), then it builds
the chains: ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩0 and ⟨B5, B4, B3⟩1. Different chains may produce
different layouts. The algorithm still produces good results, even with a
nonoptimal ordering for the equal-weight edges.

Performing Code Layout

The set of chains produced by the hot-path algorithm constitutes a partial
order on the set of basic blocks. To produce the executable code, the com-
piler must place all of the blocks into a fixed linear order. Fig. 8.19 shows
an algorithm that computes a linear layout from the set of chains. It en-
codes two simple heuristics: (1) place the blocks of a chain in order, so that
fall-through branches implement the chain’s edges, and (2) place chains in
priority order, lowest to highest.

The algorithm represents a chain as a pair, (l, p) where l is a list of blocks and
The implementation can use a sparse set for
the worklist (see Appendix B.2.3).
p is the chain’s priority. Each chain should enter the worklist exactly once.
The following table shows the algorithm’s behavior on the set of chains
derived in Fig. 8.18(b):

Step
WorkList
Code Layout

—
⟨B0, B1, B2, B3⟩0

1
⟨B5, B4⟩4
B0, B1, B2, B3

2
∅
B0, B1, B2, B3, B5, B4



The first line shows the initial state; the worklist starts with the chain that
contains B0. The algorithm removes that chain from the worklist and places
all its blocks, in order. Next, it processes the edges that leave the already
placed blocks. These edges add the chain ⟨B5, B4⟩ to the worklist.

The second iteration removes ⟨B5, B4⟩ from the worklist and places B5 and

B4 at the end of the layout. It finds no edges that lead to unplaced blocks, so
the algorithm halts.

If, instead, the algorithm had produced the chains ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩0 and
⟨B5, B4, B3⟩1, the final layout would have been different.

Step
WorkList
Code Layout

—
⟨B0, B1, B2⟩0

1
⟨B5, B4, B3⟩1
B0, B1, B2

2
B0, B1, B2, B5, B4, B3

If we assume that the estimated execution frequencies are correct, there is
no reason to prefer one layout over the other.

A Final Example

As a final example, consider the CFG shown in the margin. The first step in
the placement algorithm is to apply the hot-path algorithm. It proceeds as
follows:

Edge
Set of Chains
P

—
⟨B0⟩E, ⟨B1⟩E, ⟨B2⟩E, ⟨B3⟩E, ⟨B4⟩E
0

(B2, B3)
⟨B0⟩E, ⟨B1⟩E, ⟨B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B4⟩E
1

(B0, B2)
⟨B0, B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B1⟩E, ⟨B4⟩E
2

(B0, B4)
⟨B0, B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B1⟩E, ⟨B4⟩2
3

(B4, B3)
⟨B0, B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B1⟩E, ⟨B4⟩2
4

(B0, B1)
⟨B0, B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B1⟩4, ⟨B4⟩2
5

(B1, B2)
⟨B0, B2, B3⟩0, ⟨B1⟩4, ⟨B4⟩2
6

The algorithm halts with one multinode chain and two degenerate chains.
It captures the fact that ⟨B0, B2 B3⟩ accounts for most of the executions and
that both B4 and B1 execute infrequently.

The layout algorithm first places ⟨B0, B2, B3⟩. When it processes the out-
bound edges from those nodes, it adds both of the degenerate blocks to the
worklist. The next two iterations remove and place B4 and then B1.



SECTION REVIEW
Optimizations that examine an entire procedure have opportunities for
improvement that are not available at smaller scopes. Because the global, or
whole-procedure, scope includes cyclic paths, global optimizations usually
need global analysis. As a consequence, these algorithms typically have an
offline flavor; they analyze the code before they transform it.

This section highlighted two distinct kinds of analysis: global data-flow
analysis and runtime collection of profile data. Data-flow analysis is a
compile-time technique that accounts, mathematically, for the effects along
all possible paths through the code. By contrast, profile data records what
actually happened on a single run of the code, with a single set of input
data. Data-flow analysis is conservative, in that it accounts for all possibilities.
Runtime profiling is aggressive, in that it assumes that future runs will share
runtime characteristics with the profiling run. Both kinds of information can
play an important role in optimization.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In some situations, the compiler needs to know that a variable is live
along all paths that leave a block, rather than live along some path. Re-
formulate the equations for LIVEOUT so that they compute the set of
names that are used before definition along every path from the end
of the block to the CFG’s exit node, nf.

2.
To collect accurate edge-count profiles, the compiler can instrument
each edge in the profiled procedure’s CFG. A clever implementation can
instrument a subset of those edges and deduce the counts for the rest.
Devise a scheme that derives accurate edge-count data without instru-
menting each branch. On what principles does your scheme rely?

8.7 INTERPROCEDURAL OPTIMIZATION

As discussed in Chapter 6, procedure calls form boundaries in software sys-
tems. The division of a program into multiple procedures has both positive
and negative impacts on the compiler’s ability to generate efficient code. On
the positive side, it limits the amount of code that the compiler considers
at any one time. This effect keeps compile-time data structures small and
limits the cost of compile-time algorithms by limiting the problem sizes.

On the negative side, procedure calls make compile-time knowledge less
precise. For example, consider a call from fee to fie that passes a vari-
able x as a call-by-reference parameter. If the compiler knows that x has the



value 15 before the call, it cannot use that fact after the call, unless it knows
that the call cannot change x. To use x’s value after the call, the compiler
must prove that the formal parameter corresponding to x is not modified by
fie or any procedure fie calls, directly or indirectly.

Procedure calls also introduce direct costs in the precall, postreturn, prolog,
and epilog sequences (see Section 6.5). These sequences consist of multiple
operations, each of which takes time to execute. The transitions between
these sequences require jumps. In the general case, all of these operations
are needed. For any specific call, however, the compiler may be able to
tailor either the sequences or the body of the callee to the actual context and
achieve better performance.

Procedures and procedure calls introduce inefficiencies that intraprocedu-
Interprocedural data-flow analysis is dis-
cussed in Sections 9.2.4 and 9.4.
ral optimization cannot address. To reduce some of these inefficiencies,
the compiler can analyze and transform multiple procedures together, us-
ing interprocedural analysis and optimization. These techniques are equally
important in Algol-like languages and in object-oriented languages.

This section presents two different interprocedural optimizations: inline
substitution of procedure calls and procedure placement for improved code
locality. Because whole-program optimization requires that the compiler has
access to the code being analyzed and transformed, the decision to perform
whole-program optimization has implications for the structure of the com-
piler. Thus, the final subsection discusses the structural issues that arise in a
system that includes interprocedural analysis and optimization.

8.7.1 Inline Substitution

As we saw in Chapters 6 and 7, procedure linkage code involves a significant
number of operations. The linkage code allocates an activation record, eval-
uates each actual parameter, preserves the caller’s state, creates the callee’s
environment, transfers control from the caller to the callee and back, re-
stores the caller’s state, and, if necessary, returns values from the callee to
the caller. These runtime actions are part of the overhead of using a high-
level language; they maintain programming-language abstractions but are
not strictly needed to compute the results. Optimizing compilers try to re-
duce the cost of such overheads.

In some cases, the compiler can improve the efficiency of the final code by
Inline substitution
a transformation that replaces a call site
with a copy of the callee’s body, rewritten
to reflect the parameter bindings

replacing a call site with a copy of the callee’s body, appropriately tailored
to the context at the call site. This transformation, called inline substitution,
lets the compiler eliminate much of the code in the linkage sequences and
tailor the new copy of the callee’s body to the caller’s context. Because



■ FIGURE 8.20 Inline Substitution Example.

inline substitution moves code from one procedure to another and alters the
program’s call graph, it is inherently an interprocedural transformation.

The implementation of inline substitution partitions naturally into two sub-
problems: the actual transformation and a decision procedure that chooses
which call sites to inline. The transformation itself is relatively simple. The
decision procedure is more complex. The specific choices have a direct im-
pact on the transformation’s effectiveness.

The Transformation

To perform inline substitution, the compiler rewrites a call site with the body
of the callee, while making appropriate modifications to model the effects
of parameter binding. Fig. 8.20(a) shows two procedures, fee and fie, both
of which call a third procedure, foe. Panel (b) depicts the control flow after
inlining the call from fie to foe. The compiler has created a copy of foe
and moved it inside fie, connected fie’s precall sequence directly to the
prolog of its internal copy of foe and connected the epilog to the postreturn
sequence in a similar fashion. Some of the resulting blocks can be merged,
enabling improvement with subsequent optimization.



Of course, the compiler must use an IR that can represent the inlined pro-
cedure. Some source-language constructs can create arbitrary and unusual
control-flow constructs in the resulting code. For example, a callee with
multiple premature returns may generate a control-flow graph (CFG) that is
hard to represent in a near-source IR.

In the transformation, the compiler writer should pay attention to the prolif-
If the compiler uses data-flow analysis,
growth in the name space appears as growth
in the sizes of the sets used to solve data-
flow problems. A typical data-flow problem
uses several sets per node in the CFG.

eration of local variables. A simple implementation would create one new
local variable in the caller for each local variable in the callee. If the com-
piler inlines several procedures, or several call sites to the same callee, the
local name space can grow quite large. While growth in the name space
is not a correctness issue, it can significantly increase the compile time of
transformed code.

The Decision Procedure

Choosing which call sites to inline is a complex task. Inlining a given call
site can improve performance; unfortunately, it can also degrade perfor-
mance. To make intelligent choices, the compiler must consider a broad
range of characteristics of the caller, the callee, and the call site. The com-
piler must also understand its own strengths and weaknesses.

The primary sources of improvement from inlining are direct elimination
of operations and improved effectiveness of other optimizations. The for-
mer effect can occur when parts of the linkage sequence can be eliminated;
for example, register save and restore code might be eliminated in favor
of allowing the register allocator make those decisions. Knowledge from
the caller may prove code in the callee to be dead or useless. More precise
knowledge may also expose constant values or redundancies.

The primary source of degradation from inline substitution is decreased ef-
fectiveness of code optimization on the resulting code. Inlining the callee
can increase code size and name space size. It can increase demand for reg-
isters in the neighborhood of the original call site. Eliminating the register

Changes in architecture, such as larger
register sets, can increase the cost of a
procedure call. That change can, in turn,
make inlining more attractive.
save and restore code changes the problem seen by the register allocator. In
practice, any of these can lead to a decrease in optimization effectiveness.

At each call site, the compiler must decide whether or not to inline the call.
To complicate matters, a decision made at one call site affects the decision
at other call sites. For example, if a calls b which calls c, choosing to in-
line c into b changes both the characteristics of the procedure that might be
inlined into a and the call graph of the underlying program. Furthermore,
inlining has effects, such as code size growth, that must be viewed across
the whole program; the compiler writer may want to limit the overall growth
in code size.



Inline any call site that matches one of the following:

(1) The callee uses more than t0 percent of execution time, and

(a) the callee contains no calls, or

(b) the static call count is one, or

(c) the call site has more than t1 constant-valued parameters

(2) The call site represents more than t2 percent of all calls, and

(a) the callee is smaller than t3 , or

(b) inlining the call will produce a procedure smaller than t4

■ FIGURE 8.21 A Typical Decision Heuristic for Inline Substitution.

Decision procedures for inline substitution examine a variety of criteria at
each call site. These include:

■
Callee Size If the callee is smaller than the code in the linkage sequence,
then inlining the callee should reduce both the code size and the number
of operations executed. This situation arises surprisingly often.

■
Caller Size The compiler may limit the overall size of any procedure to
mitigate increases in compile time and decreases in optimization effec-
tiveness.

■
Dynamic Call Count An improvement to a frequently executed call pro-
vides greater benefit than the same improvement to a rarely executed
call. In practice, compilers use either profile data or simple estimates,
such as 10 times the call site’s loop nesting depth.

■
Constant-Valued Actual Parameters
If some actual parameters have
known constant values, the transformed code can fold those constants
directly into the callee’s body.

■
Static Call Count Compilers often track the number of distinct sites that
call a procedure. Any procedure called from just one call site can be
inlined without any code space growth.

■
Parameter Count The number of parameters can serve as a proxy for
the cost of the procedure linkage, as the compiler must generate code to
evaluate and store each actual parameter.

■
Calls in the Procedure Tracking the number of calls in a procedure
provides an easy way to detect leaves in the call graph. Leaf procedures
are often good candidates for inlining.

■
Loop Nesting Depth Call sites in loops execute more frequently than call
sites outside loops. They also disrupt the compiler’s ability to schedule
the loop as a single unit (see Section 12.4).

■
Fraction of Execution Time Computing the fraction of execution time
spent in each procedure from profile data can prevent the compiler from
inlining routines that cannot have a significant impact on performance.



As inlining proceeds, the compiler may need to update these metrics. For
example, inlining b into a will change both the static call count metric for b
and the calls in the procedure metric for a.

In practice, compilers precompute some or all of these metrics and then ap-
ply a set of heuristics to determine which call sites to inline. Fig. 8.21 shows
a typical heuristic. It relies on a series of threshold parameters, named t0
through t4. The specific values chosen for the parameters will govern much
of the heuristic’s behavior; for example, t3 should have a value greater than
the size of the standard precall and postreturn sequences. The best settings
for some of these parameters are almost certainly program specific.

8.7.2 Procedure Placement

The global code placement technique in Section 8.6.2 rearranged blocks
within a single procedure. The analogous whole-program problem is to re-
arrange the procedures in an executable:

Given the call graph for a program, annotated with execution fre-
quencies for each call site, rearrange the procedures to reduce
virtual-memory working-set sizes and to limit the potential for call-
induced conflicts in the instruction cache.

The principle is simple. If procedure p calls procedure q and the compiler
Virtual-to-physical address mapping may
complicate that statement, but cache asso-
ciativity should mitigate the issue.
places them next to each other in memory, then they should not conflict in
the instruction cache unless size(p) + size(q) is greater than the cache size.
Adjacent placement also increases the likelihood that p and q are located in
the same virtual memory page, which can reduce working set size and page
faults. Thus, the algorithm tries to maximize the number of calls for which
the caller and callee are adjacent.

To compute a placement, the algorithm treats the program’s call graph as a
Recall that a program’s call graph has a
node for each procedure and an edge (x,y)
for each call from x to y.
set of constraints on the relative placement of procedures in the executable
code. Each call-graph edge, (p,q), specifies an adjacency that should oc-
cur in the executable code. Unfortunately, the compiler cannot satisfy all of
those adjacencies. For example, if p calls q, r, and s, the compiler cannot
place all three of them next to p. The algorithm uses a greedy approximate
technique to find a good placement, rather than trying to compute an optimal
placement.

Procedure placement differs subtly from the global code placement problem
discussed in Section 8.6.2. The global algorithm improves the code by en-
suring that hot paths can be implemented with fall-through branches. Thus,
the chain-construction algorithm in Fig. 8.17 ignores any CFG edge unless



// Initialization work
build the call multi-graph G
initialize Q as a priority queue
// Order Q highest to lowest

for each edge (x,y) ∈ G do
// Add weights to the edges
if (x = y) then
// Self loop is irrelevant
delete (x,y) from G
else
weight( (x,y) ) ← estimated execution frequency for (x,y)

for each node x ∈ G do
list(x) ← { x }
// Initialize placement lists

if multiple edges exist from x to y then
combine them and their weights

for each edge (x,z) ∈ G do
// Put each edge into Q
Enqueue(Q , (x,z), weight( (x,z) ))

// Iterative reduction of the graph
while Q is not empty do

(x,y) ← Dequeue(Q)
// Take highest priority edge

for each edge (y,z) ∈ G do
// Move source from y to x
ReSource( (y,z), x)

for each edge (z,y) ∈ G do
// Move target from y to x
ReTarget( (z,y), x)

append list(y) to list(x)
// Update the placement list

delete y and its edges from G
// Clean up G

■ FIGURE 8.22 Analysis Phase of the Procedure Placement Algorithm.

it runs from the tail of one chain to the head of another. By contrast, as the
procedure placement algorithm builds chains of procedures, it can use edges
that run between procedures that lie in the middles of their chains because
its goal is simply to place procedures near each other—to reduce working
set sizes and to reduce interference in the instruction cache. If p calls q
and the distance from p to q is less than the cache size, placement achieves
its objectives. Thus, in some sense, the procedure placement algorithm has
more freedom than the block-layout algorithm.

Procedure placement consists of two phases: analysis and transformation.
The analysis operates on the program’s call graph. It repeatedly selects two
call graph nodes that are connected by an edge and combines them. The or-
der of combination is driven by execution frequency data, either measured or
estimated. The order of combination determines the final layout. The layout
phase is straightforward; it simply rearranges the code for the procedures
into the order chosen by the analysis phase.



Fig. 8.22 shows a greedy algorithm for the analysis phase of procedure
placement. It constructs a placement by considering call-graph edges in or-
der of decreasing execution frequency. As a first step, it builds the call graph,
When the algorithm combines edges, the
new edge receives the sum of the old edges’
weights.
annotates each edge with its estimated execution frequency, and combines
all the edges between two nodes into a single edge. As the final part of its
initialization work, it builds a priority queue of the call-graph edges, ordered
by their weights.

The second half of the algorithm iteratively constructs an order for pro-
cedure placement. The algorithm associates with each node in the graph
an ordered list of procedures. These lists specify a linear order among the
named procedures. When the algorithm halts, the lists will specify a total
order on the procedures in each node that can be used to place them in the
executable code.

The algorithm uses the call-graph edge weights to guide the process. It re-
peatedly selects the highest-weight edge, say (x,y), from the priority queue
and combines its source x and its sink y. Next, it must update the call graph
to reflect the change.

1. For each edge (y, z), it calls ReSource to replace (y, z) with (x, z) and to
update the priority queue. If (x, z) already exists, ReSource combines the
execution counts of (y, z) and the existing (x, z).
2. For each edge (z, y), it calls ReTarget to replace (z, y) with (z, x) and to
update the priority queue. If (z, x) already exists, ReTarget combines the
execution counts of (z, y) and the existing (z, x).

To force the placement of y after x, the algorithm appends list(y) to list(x).
Finally, it deletes y and its edges from the call graph.

The algorithm halts when the priority queue is empty. The final graph has
one node for each of the connected components of the original graph. If all
nodes are reachable from the program’s entry, the final graph consists of a
single node. If some nodes are not reachable, either because no path in the
program calls them or because those paths are obscured by ambiguous calls,
then the final graph will consist of multiple nodes. Either way, the compiler
and linker can use the lists associated with nodes in the final graph to specify
the relative placement of procedures.

Example

To see how the procedure placement algorithm works, consider the example
call graph shown in panel 0 of Fig. 8.23. The edge from P5 to itself is shown
in gray because it only affects the algorithm by changing the execution



■ FIGURE 8.23 Steps of the Procedure Placement Algorithm.



frequencies. A self-loop cannot affect placement since its source and sink
are identical.

Panel 0 shows the state of the algorithm immediately before the iterative
reduction begins. Each node has the trivial list that contains its own name.
The priority queue has every edge, except the self loop, ranked by execution
frequency.

Panel 1 shows the state of the algorithm after the first iteration of the while
loop. The algorithm collapsed P6 into P5, and updated both the list for P5
and the priority queue.

In panel 2, the algorithm has collapsed P4 into P5. It retargeted (P1, P4) onto
P5 and changed the corresponding edge name in the queue. It also removed
P4 from the graph and updated the list for P5.

The other iterations proceed in a similar fashion. Panel 4 shows a situation
where the algorithm combined edges. When it collapsed P5 into P1, it retar-
geted (P0, P5) onto P1. Since (P0, P1) already existed, it simply combined
their weights and updated the priority queue by deleting (P0, P5) and chang-
ing the weight on (P0, P1).

At the end of the iterations, the graph has been collapsed to a single node, P0.
While this example constructed a layout that begins with the entry node, that
happened because of the edge weights rather than by algorithmic design.

8.7.3 Pragmatics of Interprocedural Optimization

Building a compiler that performs analysis and optimization across two or
Compilation unit
The portion of a program presented to the
compiler is often called a compilation unit.
more procedures fundamentally changes the relationship between the com-
piler and the code that it produces. Traditional compilers have compilation
units of a single procedure, a single class, or a single file of code; the re-
sulting code depends solely on the contents of that compilation unit. Once
the compiler uses knowledge about one procedure to optimize another, the
correctness of the resulting code depends on the state of both procedures.

Consider the impact of inline substitution on the validity of the optimized
code. Assume that the compiler inlines fie into fee. Any subsequent edit-
ing change to fie will necessitate recompilation of fee—a dependence that
results from an optimization decision rather than from any relationship ex-
posed in the source code.

If the compiler collects and uses interprocedural information, similar prob-
lems can arise. For example, fee may call fie, which calls foe; assume that
the compiler relies on the fact that the call to fie does not change the known
constant value of the global variable x. If the programmer subsequently edits



foe so that it modifies x, that change can invalidate the prior compilations
of both fee and fie by changing the facts upon which optimization relies.
Thus, a change to foe can necessitate a recompilation of other procedures
in the program.

To make interprocedural optimization practical, manage recompilation, and
provide the necessary source code access, researchers have proposed a va-
riety of different scenarios. These include using larger compilation units,
integrating the compiler into a development environment, performing link-
time optimization, and relying on just-in-time compilation for interprocedu-
ral optimizations.

Enlarging Compilation Units

The simplest solution to the practical problems introduced by interpro-
cedural optimization is to enlarge the compilation units. If the compiler
only considers optimization and analysis within a compilation unit, it can
sidestep the issue of recompilation. It can limit its analysis and optimization
to code that is compiled together; then, it will not introduce dependences
between compilation units and it should not require access to information
about other units. The IBM PL/I optimizing compiler took this approach;
code quality improved as related procedures were aggregated into the same
file.

Of course, this approach limits the opportunities for interprocedural opti-
mization. It also encourages the programmer to create larger compilation
units and to group together procedures that call one another. Both of these
may introduce practical problems in a system with multiple programmers.
Still, as a practical matter, this organization is attractive because it is a minor
change from traditional models of compilation.

Integrated Development Environments

If the compiler is embedded inside an integrated development environment
(IDE), the compiler can access code as needed through the IDE. The IDE
can notify the compiler when source code changes so that the compiler can
determine if recompilation is needed. This model shifts ownership of both
the source code and the compiled code from the developer to the IDE. Col-
laboration between the IDE and the compiler then ensures that appropriate
actions are taken to guarantee consistent and correct optimization.

Link-Time Optimization

The compiler writer can shift interprocedural optimization into the linker,
where it will have access to all of the statically linked code. To obtain the



full benefits of this approach, the linker may also need to perform subse-
quent global optimization. Since the results of link-time optimization are
only recorded in the executable, and that executable is discarded on the
next compilation, this strategy sidesteps the recompilation problem. It al-
most certainly performs more analysis and optimization than the other ap-
proaches, but it offers both simplicity and obvious correctness.

Just-In-Time Compilation

An environment that performs runtime optimization faces a different set of
opportunities and constraints (see Chapter 14). At runtime, all of the code
for the application is available; there is no issue with access. The just-in-time
A hot-trace optimizer can easily build
traces that cross procedure calls (see Sec-
tion 14.3). Hot-method optimizers often
include inline substitution to lower the cost
of dynamic dispatch (see Section 14.4).

compiler can optimize across procedure boundaries. The system discards
JIT-compiled code at the end of execution, so recompilation concerns only
arise from changes in the code made during execution—changes that can be
handled through careful deoptimization (see the discussion on page 742).

At the same time, JITs operate under time consraints that almost certainly
prevent the JIT from applying classic whole-program analyses such as com-
puting summary information or performing interprocedural constant prop-
agation. Runtime optimization systems tend to be profile driven; they are
more likely to find and optimize specific hot calls than they are to dis-
cover that some subpart of the call tree is side-effect free. Despite these
limitations, JIT-based systems can profit from selective application of inter-
procedural optimizations. These systems do use interprocedural methods;
they do so precisely because it is profitable.

SECTION REVIEW
Analysis and optimization across procedure boundaries can reveal new
opportunities for code improvement. Examples include tailoring the
procedure linkage (precall, prolog, epilog, and postreturn sequences) to
call-site specific constant values, or laying out procedures in memory to
improve locality. Many techniques have been proposed to recognize and
exploit interprocedural opportunities; inline substitution is one of the best
known and most broadly effective of these techniques.

A compiler that applies interprocedural techniques must take care to ensure
that the executables it builds are based on a consistent view of the entire
program. Using facts from one procedure to modify the code in another can
introduce subtle dependences between the code in distant procedures,
dependences that the compiler must recognize and respect. Multiple
strategies have been proposed to mitigate these effects and demonstrated
in practical systems.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Suppose procedure a invokes b and c. If the compiler inlines the call to
b, what code space and data space savings might arise? If it inlines c as
well, are further data-space savings possible?

2.
In procedure placement, what happens to a procedure whose incom-
ing edges all have estimated execution frequencies of zero? Where
should the algorithm place such a procedure? Does the treatment of
such a procedure affect execution time performance? Can the compiler
eliminate them as useless?

8.8 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

The optimizer in a typical compiler contains a collection of techniques that
try to improve the performance of the compiled code. While most opti-
mizations try to improve runtime speed, optimizations can also target other
measures, such as code size or energy consumption. This chapter has shown
a variety of techniques that operate over scopes that range from single basic
blocks through entire programs.

Optimizations improve performance by tailoring general translation schemes
to the specific details of the code at hand. The transformations in an opti-
mizer try to remove the overhead introduced in support of source-language
abstractions, including data structures, control structures, and error check-
ing. They try to recognize special cases that have efficient implementations
and rewrite the code to realize those savings. They try to match the resource
needs of the program against the actual resources available on the target pro-
cessor, including functional units, the capacity and bandwidth of each level
in the memory hierarchy (registers, cache, translation lookaside buffers, and
memory), and instruction-level parallelism.

Before the optimizer can apply a transformation, it must determine that the
proposed rewrite of the code is safe—that it preserves the code’s original
meaning. Typically, the optimizer must analyze the code to prove safety.
In this chapter, we saw a number of approaches to proving safety, ranging
from the bottom-up construction of the value table in local value numbering
through computing LIVEOUT sets to detect uninitialized variables.

Once the optimizer has determined that it can safely apply a transforma-
tion, it must decide whether or not the rewrite will improve the code. Some
techniques, such as local value numbering, simply assume that the rewrites
they use are profitable. Other techniques, such as inline substitution, require


ChapterNotes
443

complicated decision procedures to determine when a transformation might
improve the code.

This chapter provided a basic introduction to the field of compiler-based
code optimization. It introduced many of the terms and issues that arise in
optimization. It does not include an “Advanced Topics” section; instead, the
interested reader will find additional material on static analysis in support
of optimization in Chapter 9 and on optimizing transformations in Chap-
ter 10.

CHAPTER NOTES

The field of code optimization has a long and detailed literature. For a deeper
treatment, the reader should consider some of the specialized books on the
subject [21,277,279]. It would be intellectually pleasing if code optimiza-
tion had developed in a logical and disciplined way, beginning with local
techniques, extending them first to regions, then to entire procedures, and fi-
nally to entire programs. As it happened, however, development occurred in
a more haphazard fashion. For example, the original Fortran compiler [28]
performed both local and global optimization—the former on expression
trees and the latter for register allocation. Interest in both regional tech-
niques, such as loop optimization [260], and interprocedural techniques,
such as inline substitution, crops up early in the literature, as well [17].

Local value numbering, with its extensions for algebraic simplifications and
constant folding, is usually credited to Balke in the late 1960s [17,94], al-
though it is clear that Ershov achieved similar effects in a much earlier
system [150]. Similarly, Floyd mentioned the potential for both local redun-
dancy elimination and application of commutativity [160]. The extension
to EBBs in superlocal value numbering is natural and has, undoubtedly,
been invented and reinvented in many compilers. Our treatment derives from
Simpson [59].

The tree-height balancing algorithm is due to Hunt and McKinley [105]; it
uses a rank function inspired by Huffman codes, but is easily adapted to
other metrics. The classic algorithm for balancing instruction trees is due to
Baer and Bovet [30]. In practice, the tree-height balancing algorithm might
be best applied just before scheduling.

Loop unrolling is the simplest loop nest optimization. It has a long history
in the literature [17]. Several authors have studied selection of unroll fac-
tors [130,337]. The use of unrolling to eliminate register-to-register copy
operations as in Review Question 2 for Section 8.5 is from Kennedy [225].
Unrolling can have subtle and surprising effects [118].



The ideas that underlie live analysis have been around as long as compil-
ers have been automatically allocating storage locations for values [250].
Beatty first defined live analysis in an internal IBM technical report [16].
Lowry and Medlock discuss “busy” variables [260] and the use of this in-
formation in both dead-code elimination and reasoning about interference
(see Chapter 13). The formulation of liveness as a global data-flow problem
appeared by 1971 [14,224]. It plays a key role in many optimizations (see,
for example, Sections 9.3 and 13.4).

The code-placement algorithms, at both the global and whole-program
scopes, are taken from Pettis and Hansen [293]. Subsequent work on
this problem has focused on collecting better profile data and improv-
ing the placements [171,194]. Later work includes work on branch align-
ment [72,369] and code layout [85,100,171].

Interprocedural optimization has been discussed in the literature for decades
[17,334]. While inline substitution, as a transformation, is straightforward,
its profitability has been the subject of many studies [34,108,129,309]. Hall
reports on one study where increased name space size led directly to a de-
crease in effectiveness of optimization [108]. All of the scenarios mentioned
in Section 8.7.3 have been explored in real systems [114,334,354]. Interpro-
cedural analysis has a long and rich history [19,35,37,334]. Recompilation
analysis is treated in depth by Burke and Torczon [70,347]. See the notes for
Chapter 9 for more references on interprocedural analysis. The interproce-
dural aspects of JIT compilation are discussed in more depth in Chapter 14.

EXERCISES

1.
Apply the algorithm from Fig. 8.4 to blocks B0 and B1.
Section 8.4

t1 ← a + b
t1 ← a × b
t2 ← t1 + c
t2 ← t1 × 2
t3 ← t2 + d
t3 ← t2 × c
t4 ← b + a
t4 ← 7 + t3
t5 ← t3 + e
t5 ← t4 + d
t6 ← t4 + f
t6 ← t5 + 3
t7 ← a + b
t7 ← t4 + e
t8 ← t4 - t7
t8 ← t6 + f
t9 ← t8 * t6
t9 ← t1 + 6

Block B0
Block B1

2.
Design an algorithm to convert a block of three-address code into a for-
Exposed value is defined on page 404.
est of expression trees, with the specification that each exposed value is
the root of its own tree. You may assume that you have LIVEOUT and
LIVEIN sets for the block.


Exercises
445

3.
Consider a basic block b, such as B0 or B1 in Exercise 8.1. It has n
operations, numbered from 1 to n.

a.
For a name x, USES(x) contains the index in b of each operation that
uses x as an operand. Write an algorithm to compute the USES set
for every name mentioned in block b.

b.
Apply your algorithm to blocks B0 and B1 from Exercise 8.1.

c.
For a reference to x in operation i of block b, DEF(x,i ) is the index
in b of the operation that defines the value of x visible at operation i.
Write an algorithm to compute DEF(x,i) for each reference x in b.
If x is upward exposed at i, then DEF(x,i) should be −1.

d.
Apply your algorithm to blocks B0 and B1 from Exercise 8.1.

4.
Apply the tree-height balancing algorithm from Section 8.4.2 to blocks
B0 and B1 from Exercise 8.1.

Assume LIVEOUT(B0) = {t3, t9} and LIVEOUT(B1) = {t7, t8, t9}. The
names a through f are upward-exposed in the blocks.

5.
For the control-flow graph shown in Fig. 8.24:
Section 8.5

a.
Find the extended basic blocks and list their distinct paths.

b.
Apply local value numbering (LVN) to each block.

c.
Apply superlocal value numbering (SVN) to the EBBs. Note any
improvements that it finds beyond those found by LVN.

6.
Consider the following simple five-point stencil computation:

do 20 i = 2, n-1, 1
t1 = A(i,1)
t2 = A(i,2)

do 10 j = 2, m-1, 1
t3 = A(i,j+1)

A(i,j) = 0.2 × (t1 + t2 + t3
+ A(i-1,j) + A(i+1,j))

t1 = t2
t2 = t3
10
continue
20
continue

Each iteration of the loop executes two copy operations.

a.
Loop unrolling can eliminate the copy operations. What unroll fac-
tor is needed to eliminate all copy operations in this loop?



■ FIGURE 8.24 Control-Flow Graph for Question 8.5.

b.
In general, if a loop contains multiple cycles of copy operations,
how can you compute the unroll factor needed to eliminate all of
the copy operations?

7.
At some point p, LIVE(p) is the set of names that are live at p.
Section 8.6
LIVEOUT(b) is just the LIVE set at the end of block b.

a.
Develop an algorithm that takes as input a block b and its LIVEOUT
set and produces as output the LIVE set for each operation in the
block.

b.
Apply your algorithm to blocks B0 and B1 in Exercise 8.1. Assume
that LIVEOUT(B0) = {t3, t9} and LIVEOUT(B1) = {t7, t8, t9}.

8.
Compute LIVEOUT sets for each of the blocks in the control-flow graph
shown in Fig. 8.24.

9.
Fig. 8.17 shows an algorithm for finding the hot paths in a CFG.

a.
Devise an alternative hot-path construction that pays attention to
ties among equal-weight edges.

b.
Construct two examples where your algorithm leads to a code lay-
out that improves on the layout produced by the book’s algorithm.


Exercises
447

Use the code-layout algorithm from Fig. 8.19 with the chains con-
structed by your algorithm and those built by the book’s algorithm.

10.
Consider the following psuedocode fragment. It shows a procedure fee
Section 8.7
and two call sites that invoke fee.

static int A[1000,1000], B[1000], sum;
···
x = A[i,j] + y;
call fee(i,j,1000);
···
call fee(1,1,0);
···
fee(int row; int col; int ub)
int i;

sum = A[row,col];

for (i=0; i<ub; i++)
sum = sum + B[i];

a.
What benefits would you expect from inlining fee at each of the call
sites? Estimate the fraction of fee’s code that would remain after
inlining and subsequent optimization.

b.
Based on your experience in part a, sketch a high-level algorithm
to estimate the benefits of inlining a specific call site. Your method
should consider the impact on both the caller and the callee.

11.
In the previous problem, features of the call site and its context deter-
mined the extent to which the optimizer could improve the inlined code.
Sketch, at a high level, a procedure for estimating the improvements
that might accrue from inlining a specific call site. (With such an esti-
mator, the compiler could inline the call sites with the highest estimated
profit, stopping when it reached some threshold on procedure size or
total program size.)

12.
When the procedure placement algorithm, shown in Fig. 8.22, considers
an edge (p,q) it always places p before q.

a.
Formulate a modification of the algorithm that would consider plac-
ing the sink of an edge before its source.

b.
Construct an example where this approach places two procedures
closer together than the original algorithm. Assume that all proce-
dures are of uniform size.

13.
In the example from Fig. 8.23, there are three equal weight edges:
(P0, P1), (P1, P3), and (P1, P4). Show how the algorithm would proceed
if it took those edges in another order.


This page intentionally left blank




