Chapter11

Instruction Selection

ABSTRACT
The compiler’s front end and optimizer both operate on the code in its
IR form. To create executable code, the compiler must rewrite the IR into
the processor’s instruction set. This process is called instruction selection.
Because a typical processor provides multiple ways to express most com-
putations, the selector must choose the best sequence from among multiple
implementations.

This chapter introduces two distinct approaches to instruction selection. The
first builds on peephole optimization, a classic late-stage code-improvement
technique. The second uses tree-pattern matching algorithms to find a set of
operations that implement the IR program. Both approaches are supported
by reliable tools. Both have found widespread use in real compilers.

KEYWORDS
Instruction Selection, Tree-Pattern Matching, Peephole Optimization

11.1 INTRODUCTION

To translate a program from an intermediate representation, such as an ab-
stract syntax tree or a low-level linear code, into executable form, the com-
piler must map each IR construct into an equivalent construct in the target
processor’s instruction set. Depending on the relative levels of abstraction
in the IR and the target machine’s instruction set architecture (ISA), this
translation can involve elaborating details that are hidden in the IR program
or it can involve combining multiple IR operations into a single machine in-
struction. The specific choices that the compiler makes have a direct impact
on the overall efficiency of the compiled code.

The complexity of instruction selection derives from the large number of
ways that a typical ISA can implement even simple operations. In the 1970s,
the DEC PDP/11 had a compact instruction set; thus, a good compiler such
as the BLISS-11 compiler could perform instruction selection with a simple
hand-coded pass. As processor ISAs expanded, the number of possible ways
to implement a given sequence of IR operations grew unmanageable. This
explosion led to systematic approaches for instruction selection, such as
those presented in this chapter, and tools that implement them.



Conceptual Roadmap

Instruction selection, which maps code in the compiler’s IR into code in
the target ISA, is a pattern-matching problem. At its simplest, the compiler
could provide a single assembly code sequence for each IR operation. The
resulting compiler would produce correct, albeit template-like, code that
might make poor use of the target machine’s resources. Better approaches
consider multiple code sequences for each IR operation, along with the op-
eration’s context, to choose the sequence that has the lowest expected cost.

This chapter presents two approaches to instruction selection: the first based
on peephole optimization and the second based on tree-pattern matching.
The former approach translates the compiler’s IR into a low-level linear IR,
systematically improves that IR, and then maps the improved IR into the
target machine’s ISA. The latter approach represents both the compiler’s IR
and the target machine’s ISA with tree patterns and uses pattern matching
to find an implementataion of the IR program in the target machine’s ISA.
Each of these techniques can produce high-quality code that is tailored to
the local context. Each has been incorporated into tools that take a target
machine description and produce a working instruction selector.

A Few Words About Time

The instruction selector, itself, runs at compile time to translate the IR pro-
gram created by the front end and optimizer into code expressed in the target
machine’s ISA. The code produced by selection may not be a valid assembly
program; in many compilers, the postselection code still assumes an unlim-
ited supply of virtual registers. The register allocator, which runs after the
instruction selector at compile time, completes the task of mapping the code
into the target ISA’s register set.

Many compilers use description-based instruction selectors, based on either
peephole optimization (see Section 11.3) or tree-pattern matching (see Sec-
tion 11.4). With these tools the compiler writer creates, at design time, de-
scriptions of the compiler’s IR and the target ISA. At build time, a back-end
generator analyzes these descriptions and produces code for the instruction
selector, which is then compiled and included in the compiler. This chapter
focuses on the compile-time algorithms used to perform selection.

Overview

Systematic approaches to code generation make it easier to retarget a com-
piler. The goal is to minimize the effort needed to port the compiler to a new
processor. Ideally, the front end and the optimizer need minimal changes,
and much of the back end can be reused as well. This strategy makes good



SELECTION, SCHEDULING, AND ALLOCATION
The three major processes in the back end are instruction selection,
scheduling, and register allocation. All three processes have a direct impact
on the quality of the generated code, and they all interact with each other.

Selection directly changes the scheduling problem. Selection dictates both
the time required for an operation and the functional units on which it can
execute. Scheduling might affect instruction selection. If the code generator
can implement an IR operation with either of two assembly operations, and
those operations use different resources, the code generator might need to
understand the final schedule to ensure the best choice.

Selection interacts with register allocation in several ways. If the target
processor has a uniform register set, then the instruction selector can
assume an unlimited supply of registers and rely on the allocator to insert
the loads and stores needed to fit the values into the register set. If, on the
other hand, the target machine has complex register use rules, then the
selector may need to pay close attention to specific physical registers. This
can complicate selection and predetermine some or all of the allocation
decisions. In this situation, the code generator might use a coroutine to
perform local register allocation during instruction selection.

Keeping selection, scheduling, and allocation separate—to the extent
possible—can simplify the implementation, testing, and debugging of each
process. However, since each of these processes can constrain the others,
the compiler writer must be aware of the interactions to ensure that
separation of these processes does not harm code quality.

use of the investment in building, debugging, and maintaining the reusable
parts of the compiler.

Much of the responsibility for handling diverse targets rests on the instruc-
In practice, a new language may need some
new operations in the IR. The goal, how-
ever, is to extend the IR, rather than to
reinvent it.

tion selector. A typical compiler uses a common IR for all targets and, to
the extent possible, for all the source languages that it supports. It optimizes
the IR based on a set of assumptions that hold true on most, if not all, target
machines. Finally, it uses a back end in which the compiler writer has tried
to isolate and extract the target-dependent details.

While the scheduler and register allocator need target-dependent informa-
tion, good design can isolate that knowledge into a concrete description
of the target machine and its ISA. Such a description might include register-
set sizes; a description of each operation; the number, capabilities, and op-
eration latencies of the functional units; memory alignment restrictions; and
the procedure-call convention. The algorithms for scheduling and allocation



are then parameterized by those system characteristics and reused across
different ISAs and systems.

Thus, the key to compiler retargetability lies in the implementation of the
instruction selector. The selector consumes the compiler’s IR and produces
assembly code for the target machine. A retargetable instruction selector
consists of a pattern-matching engine coupled to information about the IR,
the ISA, and the mapping between them.

If we can automate the construction of the matching engine, then specifica-
A back-end generator is sometimes called a
code-generator generator.
tion-driven construction of instruction selectors can follow the same basic
model as scanners and parsers. In those systems, the compiler writer creates
a description of the syntax and the actions to be taken; she then invokes a
scanner generator or parser generator to build the actual compiler compo-
nent. In a similar way, the compiler writer can create a description of the
target machine and invoke a back-end generator to construct an instruction
selector. The generator runs offline at build time.

This approach moves the cost and complexity of instruction selection into
the back-end generator. Just as in LR parsing, we can afford to use algo-
rithms in the generator that require more time than the algorithms that run
at compile time. In fact, tool-based instruction selectors can be extremely
efficient at compile time.

A second key to compiler retargetability is to isolate machine-dependent
code to the greatest extent possible. Ideally, all machine-dependent code
should appear in the instruction selector, scheduler, and register alloca-
tor; unfortunately, the reality almost always falls short of this ideal. Some
machine-dependent details creep, unavoidably, into earlier parts of the com-
piler. For example, the alignment restrictions on activation records (ARs)
may differ among target machines, changing offsets for values stored in
ARs. The compiler may need to represent features such as predicated exe-
cution, branch delay slots, and multiword memory operations explicitly if
it is to make good use of them. Still, pushing target-dependent details into
instruction selection can reduce the number of changes to other parts of the
compiler that are needed to port it to a new target processor.

As a design question, the compiler writer must decide how much customiza-
tion of the code should occur in the compiler’s back end. Our belief is that
the instruction selector should find a good local mapping from the code that
the optimizer produced into the target machine’s instruction set. Primary re-
sponsibility for efficiency rests with the compiler’s optimizer, not its back
end. Logic and experience suggest that we separate the goal of optimizing
computation from the goal of mapping that computation efficiently onto the
target machine.



This chapter examines two approaches used to build instruction selectors.
The next section explores background issues in instruction selection and
introduces the example used throughout the chapter. The two subsequent
sections present different ways to apply pattern-matching techniques to
transform IR sequences to assembly sequences. Section 11.3 presents an
approach based on ideas from peephole optimization. Section 11.4 explores
an approach based on matching tree patterns against trees. Both of these
methods are description based. The compiler writer creates a description of
the target ISA; a tool then constructs a selector for use at compile time. Both
methods have been used in successful portable compilers.

11.2 BACKGROUND

Instruction selection rewrites the code from IR form into target machine
code. If the IR and the ISA have similar levels of abstraction, then this
translation may be straightforward—as with rewriting ILOC code to run
on a simple RISC machine. If the IR is more abstract than the ISA, then the
selector must supply additional detail—as with mapping a near-source AST
onto a commodity microprocessor. Finally, if the IR is less abstract than the
ISA, as with GCC’s register-transfer language, then the selector may need
to combine multiple IR operations into a single target machine operation.

The compiler writer’s goals come into play, as well. The compiler writer
must confront the tradeoff between complexity in the compiler’s back end
and the performance of the compiled code. It takes a more complex compiler
to produce customized and optimized code than to produce slower template-
like code. In an appropriate context, either approach might make sense.

Chapter 5 discussed the issues that arise when the compiler translates source
code into an initial IR. Instruction selection differs from IR generation in
two major ways. First, IR generation should produce a version of the pro-
gram that compiles and optimizes well, while instruction selection should
produce a version that runs well. Second, the compiler writer has control
over the design of the IR, which can simplify the task of mapping source
code into IR; the target ISA is a fixed language, designed by other people
and bound by limited resources. Because of these differences, code genera-
tion in a compiler’s back end uses more complex approaches and algorithms
than does IR generation in its front end.

The complexity of instruction selection arises not from a particular method-
ology or algorithm, but rather, from the nature of the underlying problem—a
processor typically provides multiple ways to implement an IR construct,
each with its own costs and its own restrictions. The code generator must
choose among these alternatives based on knowledge of operation costs and



CODE THAT RUNS WELL VERSUS OPTIMIZES WELL
The difference between generating IR early in the compiler and generating
assembly code late in the compiler lies in the intended use of the code. The
IR form of the program targets optimization and code generation. The
assembly code version targets fast execution. To see how these different use
cases drive the compiler to different code sequences, consider the following
abstracted loop.

for i = 1 to 1000
for j = 1 to 1000
... A[i,j] ...

Section 7.3.2 showed two ways to compute the address of A[i,j], assuming
that A is dimensioned as A[low1:high1, low2:high2] and stored in row-major
order starting at @A:

(1)
@A + (i − low1) × len2 × w + (j − low2) × w

(2)
@A + (i × len2 × w) + (j × w)
− (low1 × len2 × w + low2 × w).

Polynomial (1) uses fewer operations; it will execute more quickly than the
latter one. Polynomial (2) separates out subexpressions that depend on i
and j, plus a term that contains only constants. A good optimizer might
move the i term out of the inner loop and evaluate the constant term at
compile time. Thus, formula (1) runs well while formula (2) optimizes well.

surrounding context. Done well, this process should produce efficient code
that is customized to fit well with the surrounding operations.

Specification-based tools can move most of the complexity of generating
customized instruction sequences from compile time back into design time
and build time. Such tools automatically construct efficient and effective
instruction selectors that manage the complexity of context in both the IR
and the ISA. They can simplify construction of an effective compiler back
end, in much the same way that scanner generators and parser generators
simplify front-end construction.

11.2.1 The Impact of ISA Design on Selection

Much of the complexity of instruction selection arises directly from prop-
Remember that ILOC, used for the exam-
ples, is an extremely simple case.
erties of a typical target machine ISA. Two factors that cause an explo-
sion in the number of cases that the selector must consider are: duplicate



mechanisms to accomplish a single task and the proliferation of address
modes in memory and arithmetic operations.

Features such as these complicate instruction selection, because they add
context, they add complexity, and they add choices. Automated techniques
for building instruction selection arose, in large part, as a response to in-
creasing processor complexity. By specifying the IR to ISA mapping in
a more concise way and algorithmically expanding that specification into
code, the tools simplify the task of building efficient and powerful selectors.

Duplicate Implementations

If the target ISA provided just one way to perform each IR operation, the
compiler could simply rewrite each IR operation with the equivalent se-
quence of machine operations. In most contexts, however, a target machine
provides multiple ways to implement each IR construct.

Consider a simple copy operation ri → rj. Assume that the target proces-
sor uses ILOC as its native instruction set. ILOC is simple, but even it
exposes the complexity of code generation. The obvious implementation
of ri → rj uses i2i ri ⇒ rj; such a register-to-register copy is typically one
of the least-expensive operations that a processor provides. However, other
implementations abound. These include,

addI ri,0
⇒ rj
subI
ri,0 ⇒ rj
multI
ri,1 ⇒ rj
divI ri,1
⇒ rj
lshiftI ri,0 ⇒ rj
rshiftI ri,0 ⇒ rj
and
ri,ri ⇒ rj
orI
ri,0 ⇒ rj
xorI
ri,0 ⇒ rj

Still more possibilities exist. If the processor has a register whose value is
always 0, another set of operations works, using add, sub, lshift, rshift,
For example, the ARM V8 has a dedicated
zero register, XZR.
or, and xor. If we consider two-operation sequences, the set is even larger.

A programmer would discount most, if not all, of these alternatives.
A register-to-register copy operation, such as i2i, is simple, fast, and
obvious. An automated process, however, may need to consider all the pos-
sibilities and their costs. The fact that an ISA can accomplish an effect in
multiple ways makes instruction selection harder. Even ILOC, a particularly
simple ISA, has many ways to perform a copy operation.

Address Modes

The arithmetic operations listed as variants for a copy operation all assumed
a register-to-register addressing model. Some ISAs provide variant opera-
tors that get one or more of their operands from memory. Other operators,
such as load and store, always address memory. To improve efficiency, ISAs
introduce address modes that encode common address computations.



RISC, CISC, AND INSTRUCTION SELECTION
Early proponents of RISC architectures suggested that RISC ISAs would lead
to simpler compilers. Early RISC machines, such as the IBM 801, had many
fewer address modes than contemporary CISC machines such as DEC’s
VAX-11 series. They featured register-to-register operations, with separate
load and store operations to move data between registers and memory. By
contrast, the VAX-11 offered both register and memory operands; many
operations were supported in both two-address and three-address forms.

The RISC machines did simplify instruction selection. They offered fewer
ways to implement a given operation. They had fewer restrictions on register
use. However, their load-store architectures increased the importance of
register allocation.

By contrast, CISC machines have operations that encapsulate more complex
functionality into a single operation. To make effective use of these
operations, the selector must recognize larger patterns over larger code
fragments. This effect increases the importance of systematic instruction
selection; the automated techniques described in this chapter are more
important for CISC machines, but equally applicable to RISC machines.

ILOC provides multiple address modes for load and store.

Operation
Meaning

load
r1
⇒ r2
MEMORY(r1)⇒ r2
loadAI
r1, c2 ⇒ r3
MEMORY(r1 + c2) ⇒ r3
loadAO
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
MEMORY(r1 + r2) ⇒ r3
loadI
c1
⇒ r2
c1 ⇒ r2

Store operations support the address-immediate (AI) and address-offset (AO)
modes. Arithmetic and logical operations also support an immediate (I)
mode that reads one operand as a literal constant embedded in the instruc-
tion stream.

Real processors often support a larger and more complex set of address
modes. Examples include memory-to-memory arithmetic operators, one or
two address operations that overwrite some of their input arguments, and
operations with implicit arguments, such as the top of a hardware-supported
runtime stack. The selector should make effective use of all the address
modes that the ISA supports.

Similar issues arise in control-flow operations. Branches and jumps may sup-
port absolute addresses, program-counter relative addresses, and addresses



of different bit-lengths. These operations have different lengths; they may
take different numbers of cycles. Because the selection of the best form of
branch or jump depends on multiple factors, including the distance and di-
rection from source to destination, selecting branch address modes requires
painstaking care.

Level of Abstraction

The individual operations in ILOC have a relatively low level of abstraction.
Modern processors often provide a mix of low-level operations and more
complex operations. For example:

■
A string-move operation allows the code to easily specify a complex
sequence that includes an implicit iterative loop.

■
A procedure-call operation might automate large parts of the call se-
quence, including management of caller-saves registers.

■
A floating-point multiply-add operation might use fewer cycles and
fewer registers to compute (ri × rj) + rk than the individual multiply and
add operations.

■
A load-multiple or store-multiple operation might move values into or
out of several contiguous registers.

Operations such as these can require the instruction selector to synthesize
several low-level operations into one higher-level operation.

Register Use

Processors constrain register use in idiosyncratic ways (see Section 13.2.4).
For example, on the IA-32, a 16-bit signed
integer multiply reads one argument from

AX and writes its 32-bit result into AX and DX.
Operations may expect one or more operands in designated locations. On
some processors, double-precision values must be stored in a pair of single-
precision floating-point registers that begin with an even-numbered register.
The use of a destructive one-address or two-address operation can overwrite
the value of one of its arguments, which complicates their allocation and use
(see Section 4.4).

Costs

Each operation has its own cost. Most modern machines implement sim-
ple operations, such as an addition or a shift, as single-cycle operations.
Other operations, such as a load or a divide, may take longer. The latency of
multiplication and division may depend on the bit patterns in the operands.
The latency of a memory operation depends on many factors, including the
detailed current state of the processor’s memory system. The latency of a
branch may depend on how well the processor can predict its outcome.



In most cases, the compiler writer wants the back end to produce code that
runs quickly. However, other metrics are possible. For example, if the final
code will run on a battery-powered device, the compiler might consider the
typical energy consumption of each operation; individual operations con-
sume different amounts of energy. A compiler that tries to optimize for
energy may use radically different costs than would one optimizing for
speed. Similarly, if code space is critical, the compiler writer might assign
costs based solely on sequence length. Alternatively, the compiler writer
Since a shorter code sequence fetches fewer
bytes from RAM, reducing code space may
also reduce energy consumption.
might simply exclude from consideration all multioperation sequences that
achieve the same effect as a single-operation sequence.

While instruction selection can play an important role in determining code
quality, the compiler writer must keep in mind the enormous size of the
search space that the instruction selector might explore. Even moderately
sized instruction sets can produce search spaces that contain millions of
states. Clearly, the compiler cannot afford to explore such spaces exhaus-
tively. The techniques that we describe explore the space of alternative code
sequences in a disciplined fashion and either limit their searches or precom-
pute enough information to make a deep search efficient.

11.2.2 Motivating Example

The discussions of instruction selection via peephole optimization and tree-
pattern matching use the same example to motivate, explain, and explore
the issues. In both cases, we examine how to generate code for the simple
assignment statement: a ← b - 2 × c. Fig. 11.1 shows the example in two dif-
This example first appeared in Fig. 4.1
on page 163.
ferent IRs. Panel (a) shows the statement in quadruple form; the discussion
of peephole-based instruction selection starts from this IR. Panel (b) shows
a low-level AST for the statement; the discussion of tree-pattern matching
uses this IR.

The example uses three variables, each with a different kind of address com-
putation: a is a local variable that resides at offset 4 from the ARP; b is a
call-by-reference parameter that resides at offset –16 from the ARP; and c
is a global variable.

The address computation for c is complex. The value resides at offset 12
from a global label. Because the label resolves to a full-length address, the
resolved address is stored in some global constant pool. The constant pool
starts at @CP and the offset in the pool is given by @G. We assume that @CP is
too large for an immediate field in an add or sub, but small enough for the
immediate field in a loadI.



■ FIGURE 11.1 Low-Level IRs for a ← b - 2 × c.

Because the example consists of a single source-level statement, it contains
no control flow. Thus, we will assume that any condition-code values de-
fined by the operations are unused and therefore dead.

Quadruples

Fig. 11.1(a) shows the example code expressed in classic quadruple form.
Variable names appear as references, with additional detail available in
the symbol table. Operations are simple three-address code. A compiler-
generated temporary name is used to carry the result of the multiply into the
subtraction. The order of the quadruples encodes the execution order.

This representation has little explicit detail. It assumes a symbol table that
contains type and location data for the named values (see Sections 4.5
and 5.4). As we will see in Section 11.3, the peephole instruction selec-
tor will immediately expand this code to make all of the necessary details
explicit and exposed in the IR code itself.

Low-Level AST

To expose enough detail for instruction selection, the AST shown in
Fig. 11.1(b) has a low-level of abstraction. Several of the nodes in the tree
need further explanation.

Constant values are represented by three distinct kinds of nodes:

■
A NUM node represents a constant that fits into the immediate field of a
three-operand immediate instruction (e.g., multI or loadAI).

■
A CON node, not shown in this example, represents a constant that is small
enough to fit in a loadI, but too large for a NUM.



■
A LAB node represents a relocatable symbol, typically an assembly-level
label used for either code or data.

The distinction between these kinds of constants is critical to instruction se-
lection. A value in a CON or LAB node cannot appear as an immediate operand
in a multI operation. A value represented by a LAB node is assumed to be too
large to fit in a loadI operation; the compiler stores such values into a con-
stant pool in memory, located at @CP.

Two other nodes in this tree have nonobvious meanings. A VAL node repre-
sents a value known to reside in a register, such as the ARP in rarp, or the
result of evaluating a common subexpression identified by the optimizer.
A ◆ node signifies a level of indirection; its child is an address and it pro-
duces the value stored at that address.

The low-level detail in the AST allows the instruction selector to tailor its
decisions to specific context. The subtrees that describe the address expres-
sions for a, b, and c all look similar; as we shall see, they generate distinctly
different code due to the specific base addresses and offsets. By tailoring the
final assembly code to context, the compiler can produce efficient code for
each subtree.

11.2.3 Ad-Hoc Matching

The compiler writer can construct an instruction selector around a hand-
written, ad-hoc matcher. Such a selector would recognize individual IR
constructs or small sets of related constructs and map them directly into
the assembly language (ASM) of the target machine. For a tree-based IR,
this approach might result in a simple postorder walk, similar to the syntax-
driven translation schemes of Chapter 5. For a linear IR, the compiler writer
might produce a selector that makes a linear scan over the IR and emits code
for each operation.

Instruction selectors built around ad-hoc matching tend to produce uniform,
template-like code. To take better advantage of the target machine’s ISA
requires the aggregation of context from the IR program. The selector can
only make effective use of complex address modes if it builds up some rep-
resentation, implicit or explicit, of the address computation; it can use that
model to choose the best load or store operation. The selector can only
make use of immediate-mode operations if it understands, even in limited
ways, the flow of constant values through the code and the magnitudes of
those values.

Finally, ad-hoc matching provides little, if any, support for retargeting the
compiler to another processor. Portability is a key rationale for isolating



the instruction selector both from optimization and from register allocation
and instruction scheduling. A tool-based approach to specification-driven
instruction selectors should simplify the task of retargeting the compiler to
a new processor or system.

SECTION REVIEW
An instruction selector rewrites the IR code into the target machine’s
assembly code. It must, for each IR construct, choose an efficient
assembly-language implementation, tailored to the surrounding context.
The selector itself must run quickly.

Instruction selection is hard because of the sheer number of choices that
the selector confronts. It must choose from multiple operations. It must
make effective use of the target’s address modes. It must model any
restrictions on processor resource use and ensure that the generated code
respects them. Because each choice affects the runtime efficiency of the
compiled code, the selector plays a critical role in application performance.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
Enumerate as many ways as you can in ILOC to set register ri to contain
the integer value one.

2.
Consider an operation move ri ⇒ rk that copies four bytes from memory
address ri to memory address rk at a cost of one more cycle than the
equivalent load operation. What advantages might such an operation
present?

11.3 SELECTION VIA PEEPHOLE OPTIMIZATION

Peephole optimization is a late-stage optimization technique developed
in the 1960s and 1970s. Some compilers use peephole optimization as a
paradigm for instruction selection. They use a selector that translates the IR
program into a low-level IR (LLIR), applies systematic local optimization to
the LLIR, and then uses matching to map the LLIR into target machine in-
structions. The local optimization builds up the knowledge needed to target
effectively processor features such as address modes. It also systematically
eliminates minor inefficiencies that optimization at a higher level of abstrac-
tion might miss.



11.3.1 Peephole Optimization

The basic premise of peephole optimization is simple: the compiler can ef-
ficiently find local improvements by examining short sequences of adjacent
operations. This premise seems to contradict the earlier assertion that the
optimizer has done its job well. The distinction is subtle. When peephole
optimization finds an opportunity, it is often at a lower level of abstraction
than the IR exposed to the optimizer.

As originally proposed, a peephole optimizer ran as the compiler’s last pass.
It both read and wrote assembly code (ASM). The optimizer moved a sliding
window, or “peephole,” over the code. At each step, it examined the oper-
ations in the window, looking for specific patterns that it could improve.
When it recognized a pattern, it would rewrite the code with a better in-
struction sequence. The combination of a limited pattern set and a limited
window made these optimizers fast.

A classic example pattern is a store followed by a load from the same loca-
tion. The load can be replaced by a copy operation.

storeAI r1
⇒ rarp, 8

loadAI
rarp, 8 ⇒ r15
⇒
storeAI r1 ⇒ rarp, 8

i2i
r1 ⇒ r15

Inefficiencies similar to this one often result from statement-by-statement
translation and from other optimizations, such as dead-code elimination or
constant folding. Other patterns amenable to improvement by peephole op-
timization include simple algebraic identities, such as:

subI r2,0
⇒ r7
mult r4,r7 ⇒ r10
⇒
mult r4, r2 ⇒ r10

and cases where the target of a branch is, itself, a branch:

jumpI → L10

L10:
jumpI → L11
⇒
jumpI → L11

L10:
jumpI → L11

If this eliminates the last branch to L10, then the block at L10 becomes un-
reachable and can be eliminated. Unfortunately, proving that the operation
at L10 is unreachable takes more analysis than is typically available during
peephole optimization (see Section 10.2.2).

Early peephole optimizers used a limited set of hand-coded patterns. They
used exhaustive search to match the patterns but ran quickly because they



used a small number of patterns and a small window size—typically two or
three operations.

Peephole optimization has progressed beyond matching a small number of
patterns. More complex ISAs created more opportunities that led to a more
systematic approach to optimization. Modern peephole optimizers improve
the code through systematic application of symbolic interpretation and sim-
plification.

A peephole instruction selector builds on that philosophy. It breaks the
selection process into three distinct tasks: expansion, simplification, and
matching.

Structurally, this system looks like a compiler. It takes as input the com-
We carefully say “resembles” because the
instruction selector may produce code that
uses virtual registers rather than physical
registers.

piler’s IR; it produces as output code that resembles the target machine’s
assembly language (ASM). Assume that the selector processes one basic
block at a time.

The expander rewrites the IR into a sequence of low-level IR (LLIR) op-
erations that capture all of the block’s effects—at least, all of those that
affect program behavior. For example, if add ri, rj ⇒ rk sets the condition
code, then the LLIR code must both assign ri + rj to rk and set the condition
code to the correct value. Typically, the expander rewrites operations in a
template-driven pass that ignores context.

The simplifier makes a pass over the LLIR. It slides a small window over the

LLIR—say three to four operations. Within the window, it tries to improve
the code by systematic application of four transformations: forward substi-
tution, algebraic simplification, evaluation of constant-valued expressions,
and elimination of dead effects, such as the creation of unused condition
codes. It subjects all the details in the LLIR code to a uniform level of local
optimization.

The matcher compares the simplified LLIR against a pattern library, looking
for the pattern that best captures all the effects in the LLIR. The final code
sequence may produce effects beyond those required by the LLIR sequence;
for example, it might create new, albeit dead, condition-code values. It must,
however, preserve the effects needed for correctness. It cannot eliminate a
live value, regardless of whether the value is stored in memory, in a register,
or in an implicitly set location such as the condition code.



Op
Arg1
Arg2
Result

×
2
c
t1

-
b
t1
a

Expand
⇒

r1
← 2

r2
← @CP

r3
← @G

r4
← r2 + r3

r5
← M(r4)

r6
← 12

r7
← r5 + r6

r8
← M(r7)

r9
← r1 × r8

r10 ← 16

r11 ← rarp - r10

r12 ← M(r11)

r13 ← M(r12)

r14 ← r13 - r9

r15 ← 4

r16 ← rarp + r15

M(r16) ← r14

⇓
Simplify
loadI
2
⇒ r1

loadI
@CP
⇒ rt1

loadAI
rt1, @G
⇒ r5

loadAI
r5, 12
⇒ r8

mult
r1,r8
⇒ r9

subI
rarp, 16 ⇒ rt2

load
rt2
⇒ r12

load
r12
⇒ r13

sub
r13,r9
⇒ r14

storeAI r14
⇒ rarp,4

Match
⇐

r1
← 2

r5
← M(@CP + @G)

r8
← M(r5 + 12)

r9
← r1 × r8

r12 ← M(rarp - 16)

r13 ← M(r12)

r14 ← r13 - r9

M(rarp + 4) ← r14

■ FIGURE 11.2 Expand, Simplify, and Match Applied to the Example.

Fig. 11.2 summarizes how this approach might work on the example from
Fig. 11.1(a). It begins, in the upper left, with the code expressed as quadru-
ples. They compute a ← b - 2 × c. The expander creates the LLIR program
Recall that a is at ARP + 4, b is at
ARP − 16, and c is at offset 12 from @G.
shown in the upper right corner. The simplifier reduces this code to pro-
duce the LLIR code in the bottom right corner. From this LLIR program,
the matcher builds the ILOC program shown in the lower left. This final
program uses ten operations to implement a ← b - 2 × c.



r1 ← 2

r2 ← @CP

r3 ← @G

r2 ← @CP

r3 ← @G

r4 ← r2 + r3

r4 ← @CP + @G

r5 ← M(r4)

r6 ← 12

r5 ← M(@CP + @G)

r6 ← 12

r7 ← r5 + r6

Sequence 1
Sequence 2
Sequence 3
Sequence 4

r5 ← M(@CP + @G)

r7 ← r5 + 12

r8 ← M(r7)

r5 ← M(@CP + @G)

r8 ← M(r5 + 12)

r9 ← r1 × r8

r8 ← M(r5 + 12)

r9 ← r1 × r8
r10 ← 16

r9 ← r1 × r8
r10 ← 16

r11 ← rarp - r10

Sequence 5
Sequence 6
Sequence 7
Sequence 8

r9 ← r1 × r8
r11 ← rarp - 16

r12 ← M(r11)

r9 ← r1 × r8
r12 ← M(rarp - 16)

r13 ← M(r12)

r12 ← M(rarp - 16)

r13 ← M(r12)

r14 ← r13 - r9

r13 ← M(r12)

r14 ← r13 - r9
r15 ← 4

Sequence 9
Sequence 10
Sequence 11
Sequence 12

r14 ← r13 - r9
r15 ← 4

r16 ← rarp + r15

r14 ← r13 - r9
r16 ← rarp + 4

M(r16) ← r14

r14 ← r13 - r9
M(rarp + 4) ← r14

M(rarp + 4) ← r14

Sequence 13
Sequence 14
Sequence 15
Sequence 16

■ FIGURE 11.3 Sequences Produced by the Simplifier.

11.3.2 The Simplifier

The simplifier forms the heart of the peephole process. To begin, it fills the
window from the LLIR stream. Next, it tries to forward substitute defined
values into uses later in the window. It applies algebraic simplification and
constant folding. If any of these transformations make one of the operations
in the window dead, it eliminates the dead operation and pulls a new one
into the bottom of the window.

When the simplifier cannot further improve the code in the window, it emits
the first operation in the window and pulls a new operation into the bot-
tom of the window. This action “slides” the window down the block, one
operation at a time.

Fig. 11.3 shows the contents of the simplifier’s window at each step of
the example. It assumes a three-operation window. Sequence 1 shows the
window with the first three operations. No simplification is possible. The
simplifier emits r1 ← 2 and discards it. Next, it moves the fourth operation,
which defines r4, into the bottom of the window to create sequence 2.



In sequence 2, the simplifier can forward substitute both r2 and r3 into the
1
r1
← 2

6
r5
← M(@CP + @G)

7
r8
← M(r5 + 12)

10
r9
← r1 × r8

11
r12
← M(rarp - 16)

12
r13
← M(r12)

15
r14
← r13 - r9

16
M(rarp + 4) ← r14

Code Emitted by the Simplifier

addition, which makes the definitions of r2 and r3 both dead. The simpli-
fier discards them and rolls the next two operations into the window. In
sequence 3, it folds the definition of r4 into the load, discards the definition
of r4, and rolls the next operation into the window. The process continues in
this manner. The table in the margin shows the operations that the simplifier
emits, along with the number of the sequence after which the operation is
emitted. The final code shown in Fig. 11.2 consists of precisely these emit-
ted operations.

Several issues affect the peephole selector’s ability to improve code. The
ability to detect when a value is dead plays a critical role in simplification.
The size of the peephole window limits the optimizer’s ability to combine
related operations. For example, a larger window would let the simplifier
fold the constant 2 into the multiply operation. The handling of control-flow
operations determines what happens at block boundaries.

Recognizing Dead Values

When the simplifier confronts a sequence similar to the one shown in the
r12 ← 2

r14 ← r12 + r12
margin, it can rewrite the uses of r12 in the addition with 2 and evaluate the
addition. It cannot, however, eliminate the definition of r12 unless it knows
that r12 is dead after its uses in the add operation. Thus, the ability to recog-
nize when a value is dead plays a critical role in the simplifier’s operation.

The compiler can compute LIVEOUT sets for each block and then, in a back-
Live analysis is discussed in Sections 8.6.1
and 9.2.2.
ward pass over the block, track which values are live at each operation. As
an alternative, it can use the insight that underlies the semipruned SSA form;
it can identify names that are used in more than one block and consider any
such name live on exit from each block. This latter strategy avoids the ex-
pense of live analysis; it will correctly identify any value that is strictly local
to the block where it is defined. All of the effects introduced by the expander
are strictly local, so this cheaper approach should work well.

Given either LIVEOUT sets or the set of global names, the expander can
This analysis should be interleaved with the
expansion so that it produces its results for
the LLIR code.
mark last uses in the LLIR. Two observations make this possible. First, the
expander can process a block from bottom to top; the expansion is a sim-
ple template-driven process. Second, as it walks the block from bottom to
top, the expander can build a set of values that are live at each operation,
LIVENOW.

The computation of LIVENOW is simple. The expander sets the initial value
for LIVENOW equal to either the LIVEOUT set for the block or the set of
global names. The algorithm iterates over the operations, from the bot-
tom of the block to its top. At each operation, ri ← rj op rk, it deletes ri



from LIVENOW and adds rj and rk. This algorithm produces, at each step,
a LIVENOW set that is as precise as the initial information used at the bottom
of the block.

On a machine that uses a condition code to control conditional branches,
many operations set the condition code’s value. In a typical block, many
of those condition code values are dead. The expander must insert explicit
assignments to the condition code. The simplifier must understand when
the condition code’s value is dead because extraneous assignments to the
condition code may prevent the matcher from generating some instruction
sequences.

For example, consider the computation ri × rj + rk. If both × and + set the
rt1 ← ri × rj
cc ← f×(ri, rj)

rt2 ← rt1 + rk
cc ← f+(rt1, rk)

LLIR for ri × rj + rk

condition code, the two-operation sequence might generate the LLIR shown
in the margin. The first assignment to cc is dead. If the simplifier eliminates
that assignment, it can combine the other operations into a multiply-add
operation, assuming that the ISA includes such an instruction. If it cannot
eliminate cc ← f×(ri, rj), however, the matcher will not use multiply-add
because it does not set cc twice.

Physical Versus Logical Windows

The discussion, so far, has focused on a window containing adjacent oper-
ations in the LLIR. This notion has a nice physical intuition and makes the
concept concrete. However, adjacent operations in the LLIR may not operate
on the same values. In fact, as target machines offer more instruction-level
parallelism, a compiler’s front end and optimizer must generate IR programs
that have more independent and interleaved computations to keep the target
machine’s functional units busy. In this case, the peephole selector may find
very few opportunities for improving the code.

To improve this situation, the peephole selector can use a logical window
rather than a physical window. With a logical window, it considers opera-
tions that are connected by the flow of values within the code—that is, it
considers together operations that define and use the same value. This cre-
ates the opportunity to combine and simplify related operations, even if they
are not adjacent in the code.

During expansion, the optimizer can link each definition with the next use of
its value in the block. The simplifier uses these links to fill its window. When
the simplifier reaches operation i, it constructs a window for i by pulling in
operations linked to i’s result. Using a logical window within a block can
make the simplifier more effective, reducing both the compile time required
and the number of operations remaining after simplification.



In the example, the simplifier cannot fold the constant two into the multiply
operation because the two operations are never in the window together. In a
simplifier with a logical window, the multiply and the immediate load would
be in the window together, so the simplifier could substitute the value two
into the multiply, and eliminate the immediate load operation.

We can extend this idea to multiple blocks. The compiler can attempt to
simplify operations that are logically adjacent, even if they are in differ-
ent blocks. Using multiple blocks requires a global analysis to determine
which uses each definition can reach, such as reaching definitions from
Section 9.2.4. Additionally, the simplifier must recognize that one defini-
tion may reach multiple uses, and one use might refer to values computed
by several distinct definitions. Thus, the simplifier cannot simply combine
the defining operation with one use and leave the remaining operations
stranded. It must either limit its consideration to simple situations, such as
a single definition and a single use or multiple uses with a single definition,
or it must perform detailed analysis to determine whether a combination is
both safe and profitable. Restricting the logical window to an extended basic
block avoids some of these complications.

11.3.3 The Matcher

The final component of a peephole selector is the matching phase that maps
an arbitrary LLIR sequence onto the target machine’s ISA. Peephole se-
lectors have used different technologies to implement the matcher, ranging
from parsers adapted to the task to ad-hoc code. The choice between these
approaches depends heavily on the size and complexity of the target instruc-
tion set and the availability of tools.

The goal for a generated instruction selector is to reduce the amount of work
needed to retarget a compiler. With a specification-driven matcher, the com-
piler writer creates a description of the ISA and its relationship to the LLIR;
the build-time generator then constructs the matcher that runs at compile
time. The compiler writer must ensure that (1) the description covers the
full set of possible LLIR sequences and (2) the description makes good use
of the target ISA, including its address modes and specialized operations.

With a hand-coded matcher, the compiler writer modifies the matcher di-
rectly so that it emits the appropriate target ISA operations. That task sounds
daunting; however, the differences between processor ISAs are typically
smaller than the similarities between them. Logical and arithmetic opera-
tions function in similar ways across most architectures; the differences lie
in the way they name operands and their side effects on system state (such
as setting a condition code).



Several important compiler systems have used peephole selectors. The
Gnu compiler system, GCC, uses an LLIR called register-transfer language
(RTL) for some optimizations and for code generation. The back end uses a
peephole selector to convert RTL into target-machine ASM. The matcher
interprets the RTL as trees and uses a tree-pattern matcher built from a
target-machine description. By contrast, the matcher in Davidson’s VPO
The parser must handle the ambiguities
introduced by the presence of multiple
ways to implement a given LLIR sequence.
uses a parser that treats the LLIR as a linear form and emits target-machine
code as it parses. It builds the selector from a description of the target ISA
and from its own knowledge of the LLIR used in the system.

These peephole-based systems have two fundamental strengths.

■
Systematic late-stage simplification lets the compiler eliminate ineffi-
ciencies left behind by earlier phases in the translation.

■
Forward substitution and constant folding expose opportunities to map

LLIR sequences into processor address modes.

The net result is a final program that executes fewer operations and takes
better advantage of the target machine’s instruction set.

SECTION REVIEW
Peephole optimization can form the basis of a fast and effective instruction
selector. A peephole selector consists of a template-driven expander that
translates the compiler’s IR into a more detailed low-level IR; a simplifier that
uses forward substitution, algebraic simplification, constant propagation,
and dead-code elimination within a small, moving window; and a matcher
that maps the optimized low-level IR onto the target ISA.

The strength of this approach lies in the simplifier; it removes interoperation
inefficiencies introduced in the translation process. It focuses on
opportunities that involve local values; many of those opportunities are
hidden at earlier stages of translation. The resulting improvements can be
surprising. The final matching phase is straightforward; technologies
ranging from hand-coded matchers to LR parsers have been used.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Sketch an algorithm for the simplifier. What is the algorithm’s complex-
ity? How does peephole-window size affect the time bound?

2.
How might you extend the simplifier so that it uses the algebraic iden-
tities from Fig. 8.3 to improve the LLIR code?



11.4 SELECTION VIA TREE-PATTERN MATCHING

Another way to attack the complexity of instruction selection is with tree-
pattern matching tools. To transform code generation into a tree-pattern
matching problem, both the IR form of the program and the target machine’s
instruction set must be expressed as trees. The compiler can use a low-level

AST as a detailed model of the code being compiled. It can use similar trees
to represent the operations available on the target processor. For example,

ILOC’s addition operations might be modeled by operation trees like those
shown in the margin for add and addI. By systematically matching such op-
eration trees, or pattern trees, with subtrees of an AST, the compiler can
discover all the potential implementations for the subtree.

Given a low-level AST for the code and a collection of operation trees for the
target ISA, the matcher constructs a tiling of the AST with operation trees.
A tile is a pair, ⟨x,y⟩, where x is a node in the AST and y is the root of an
operation tree. A tiling is a set of pairs that meet the following constraints:

1. The set of tiles covers every AST node.

2. The root of each operation tree overlays a leaf in another operation tree,
unless it overlays the root of the AST.

3. Where two operation trees overlap, they are compatible; that is, they
agree in both storage class and value type.

4. The overlap between any two operation trees in the set occurs at a single
node.

A set of pairs that meets these criteria is a tiling; it implements the AST.

The presence of a pair ⟨x, y⟩ in the tiling indicates that the AST subtree
rooted at x can be implemented by the operation tree rooted at y. Unless x is
a leaf, the choice of y will depend on finding implementations for subtrees
of x that work with y. To build a tiling, the compiler must ensure that both
the entire tree and each of its subtrees can be implemented by the specified
set of operation trees.

Given a tiling that implements an AST, the compiler can generate assembly
code in a bottom-up walk over the AST. Thus, the key to making practical
instruction selectors based on tree-pattern matching lies in algorithms that
find good tilings for an AST. Tools exist for several different techniques:
tree matching, text matching, and bottom-up rewrite systems (BURSs). The
tools associate costs with operation trees and produce minimal-cost tilings.
This section focuses on tree matching, but the insights carry over to text
matching and BURSs.



11.4.1 Representing Trees

We need a notation to describe both ASTs and tree patterns. Prefix notation
is well-suited to this task. For example, the add operation shown in the mar-
gin is + (Regi, Regj) in prefix form, and the addI operation is + (CONi, Regj).
This same notation works for both low-level ASTs that represent executable
code and the pattern trees that represent target-machine operations. The ex-
amples in this chapter limit themselves to integer operations. Extending the
rules to other data types adds many new patterns, but few new insights.

The operands of a subtree are either subtrees or leaves. Subtrees are ex-
pressed in prefix notation, as with the multiply subtree in the AST shown in
the margin: + (× (CON2, Regy), Regx). Leaves are assigned symbolic names that
encode information about the type and storage location of the operand. For
example, Regi indicates a value that resides in a register and CONj indicates
a constant value. In an AST, labels such as VAL, NUM, LAB, and CON provide
more detailed information (see page 585). Subscripts are added to names
for uniqueness. We can rewrite the AST from Fig. 11.1(b) into prefix form:

←
(+ (VAL1, NUM1),

- (◆ (◆ (- (VAL2, NUM2))), × (NUM3,◆ (+ (LAB1, NUM4)))))

While the drawing of the tree may be more intuitive, this linear prefix form
contains precisely the same information.

Throughout this section, we will assume that the IR uses virtual names;
that is, the supply of names is unlimited (see Section 1.4). After selection,
a register allocator will map the virtual names onto the target machine’s
limited set of physical registers (see Chapter 13).

11.4.2 Rewrite Rules

To build an instruction selector based on tree-pattern matching, the com-
piler writer creates a set of rewrite rules that maps the AST into the target
machine’s ISA. Each rule consists of a tree pattern, a code template, and
an associated cost. These tree patterns describe the structure of the AST.
Fig. 11.4 shows the ILOC subset that we will use in the ongoing examples.

The patterns resemble productions in a context-free grammar (CFG). Each
pattern has a left-hand side (LHS) and a right-hand side (RHS); as in a CFG,
the LHS and RHS are separated by the derives symbol, →. The drawing
in the margin shows the tree for a three-register add and its corresponding
pattern. The labels give names to the various definitions and uses. The in-
put arguments are Reg1 and Reg2, respectively. The output of the operation
is Reg0.



Arithmetic Operations
Memory Operations

add
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
store
r1
⇒ r2
addI
r1, c2 ⇒ r3
storeAO
r1
⇒ r2, r3
sub
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
storeAI
r1
⇒ r2, c3
subI
r1, c2 ⇒ r3
loadI
c1
⇒ r3
rsubI
r2, c1 ⇒ r3
load
r1
⇒ r3
mult
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
loadAO
r1, r2 ⇒ r3
multI
r1, c2 ⇒ r3
loadAI
r1, c2 ⇒ r3

■ FIGURE 11.4 The ILOC Subset.

Some symbols appear exclusively on the RHS of patterns. These symbols
are analogous to the terminal symbols in a CFG; they represent concrete
symbols that can be leaves in a tree. Other symbols appear on either the
LHS or RHS of a pattern. These symbols are analogous to the nontermi-
nal symbols in a CFG; they are syntactic variables used to tie productions
together into sequences.

A rule set consists of a collection of related rules that, together, can tile a
tree. Fig. 11.5 shows a rule set for the low-level AST that we described in
Section 11.2.2. Each rule represents a small AST. For example, rule 8 was
shown earlier in the margin. Its RHS describes the + node and its children.
The rule’s LHS corresponds to the label on the + node, Reg0 in the margin
drawing.

Rule 19 deals with a common problem: the code needs to load a constant
Rule 19 is too simple. In practice, the com-
piler might place the constant pool at a
known offset from the procedure’s entry
point. The prolog code could either load @CP
to a register or store it in the local data area.

value that is too large to accommodate in a load immediate operation. The
code template suggests one way to solve the problem. It assumes that each
procedure has a unique, statically initialized constant pool, and it represents
the start of that constant pool with the symbol @CP. Further, it assumes that @L
is the positive offset of LAB1 from @CP. With these assumptions, the emitted
code loads @CP into a register and uses it as the base address for a loadAI
operation.

The rules in Fig. 11.5 describe the set of potential ASTs for a list of assign-
ments. Not all the rules produce code. For example, rules 0 and 1 create an
ordered list of Stmt, the nonterminal symbol for an assignment statement.
Rules 20 through 23 handle address mode selection and rule 24 is used in
immediate-mode operations.

Interactions between the patterns, encoded through the use of LHS symbols,
define the ways in which subtrees can combine. For example, productions 5
through 20 each have Reg on their LHS. Thus, each of those rules describes
a subtree that can rewrite a Reg.



Production
Cost
Code Template

0
Goal → Goal Stmt
0

1
Goal → Stmt
0

2
Stmt →
← (Reg1,Reg2)
3
store
r2 ⇒ r1

3
Stmt →
← (T11,Reg2)
3
storeAO r2 ⇒ T1.r1,T1.r2

4
Stmt →
← (T21,Reg2)
3
storeAI r2 ⇒ T2.r,T2.n

5
Reg
→ ◆ (Reg1)
3
load
r1 ⇒ rnew

6
Reg
→ ◆ (T11)
3
loadAO
T1.r1,T1.r2 ⇒ rnew

7
Reg
→ ◆ (T21)
3
loadAI
T2.r,T2.n ⇒ rnew

8
Reg
→ + (Reg1,Reg2)
1
add
r1,r2 ⇒ rnew

9
Reg
→ + (Reg1,T32)
1
addI
r1,T3 ⇒ rnew

10
Reg
→ + (T31,Reg2)
1
addI
r2,T3 ⇒ rnew

11
Reg
→ - (Reg1,Reg2)
1
sub
r1,r2 ⇒ rnew

12
Reg
→ - (Reg1,T32)
1
subI
r1,T3 ⇒ rnew

13
Reg
→ - (T31,Reg2)
1
rsubI
r2,T3 ⇒ rnew

14
Reg
→ × (Reg1,Reg2)
2
mult
r1,r2 ⇒ rnew

15
Reg
→ × (Reg1,T32)
2
multI
r1,T3 ⇒ rnew

16
Reg
→ × (T31,Reg2)
2
multI
r2,T3 ⇒ rnew

17
Reg
→ CON1
1
loadI
CON1 ⇒ rnew

18
Reg
→ NUM1
1
loadI
NUM1 ⇒ rnew

19
Reg
→ LAB1
4
loadI
@CP ⇒ rnew1
loadAI
rnew1,@L ⇒ rnew2
20
Reg
→ VAL1
0

21
T1
→ + (Reg1,Reg2)
0

22
T2
→ + (Reg1,T32)
0

23
T2
→ + (T31,Reg2)
0

24
T3
→ NUM1
0

■ FIGURE 11.5 Rewrite Rules for Tiling the Low-Level Tree with ILOC.

The LHS symbols encode knowledge about the type and storage class of the
values that they represent. For example, a Reg represents a value in a register.
A Reg might result from a subtree that produces an integer value stored in a
register, as in rules 5 through 16. It might also result from a CON, a NUM, or a
LAB, through productions 17, 18, and 19. Rule 20 provides a way to convert a
VAL node to a Reg—essentially, it names the value. The VAL might be a global
value, such as the ARP, or it might be the result of a computation performed
in a disjoint subtree, such as a redundant expression found by the optimizer.



T1 and T2 represent addresses—values that can be computed in address
modes such as loadAO and loadAI. T3 represents a NUM used directly as an
immediate operand.

Finally, note that the rule set is ambiguous. Rules 9 and 22 have the same
RHS, as do rules 10 and 23. Those pairs have different purposes and differ-
ent costs. Rule 9 represents an explicit, general purpose add operation, while
rule 22 represents an add operation done by the memory address hardware.

Cost Estimates

Each rule has a cost; that cost should provide a realistic estimate of the
Some systems only allow fixed costs. Oth-
ers let the costs vary during matching to
reflect prior choices.
runtime cost of executing the code in the template. Fig. 11.5 assumes that
addition and subtraction require one cycle, multiplication takes two, and
memory operations need three cycles, a reasonable estimate for a hit in the
first-level data cache. Rules that generate no code, such as rule 22, have zero
cost. The cost estimates will drive choices among alternative rules.

A full rule set might have multiple rules that require more than one target-
machine operation, as rule 19 does. The tree-matching algorithm sees such
a rule as a single pattern. As long as the cost estimates are accurate, the
presence of multiple-operation sequences should not complicate matters.

Building a Rule Set

A common strategy in constructing a rule set is to begin with a minimal
set of rules that covers the tree. That is, the compiler writer can derive a
set of rules that has a pattern for every node in the AST and a correct code
sequence for each pattern. Once that rule set has been designed, tested, and
debugged, the compiler writer can add rules with patterns that use special-
ized operations to handle more complex cases.

Restrictions on the Rule Set

To simplify the code in the tree-pattern matcher, we restrict the rule set in
two ways. First, each pattern includes at most one operator. Any multiop-
erator rule can be rewritten into a sequence of single-operator rules.

Consider two possible rule sets for an ILOC storeAO operation, shown in
This special case matters if the hardware
can compute the sum in the address unit, as
in storeAO.
Fig. 11.6. Panel (a) shows a single rule, ← (+ (Reg1,Reg2),Reg3). It special-
izes the general store operation described by rule 2 for the case when the
address is the sum of two registers. Panel (b) shows two single-operator pat-
terns that together tile the same subtree. To create the single-operator rules,
the compiler writer introduced a new name, T1, that appears only in the ad-
dress computation of a storeAO or a loadAO. The rules in panel (a) and (b)
are equivalent; they tile the same set of LLIR subtrees.



■ FIGURE 11.6 Single-Operator Patterns Versus Multioperator Patterns.

The restriction to single-operator rules greatly simplifies the code for the
tree-pattern matcher. To match the pattern in panel (a), the matcher must
inspect both the + node and the ← node together, or it must carry along
explicit state to track such matches. Either approach adds complexity and
cost to the implementation.

With the two single-operator patterns in panel (b), the matcher makes purely
local decisions. The AST subtree + (Reg,Reg) matches both the general rule
that describes an add (rule 8) and the rule that describes a T1 (rule 21). Mov-
ing up to that subtree’s parent, the matcher can produce matches to each of
rule 2, for the left child’s label as a Reg, and rule 3, for the left child’s label
as a T1.

The key to making single operator rules produce the desired results for com-
plex target-machine operations lies in the cost structure of the rule set. With
single operator patterns, the sum of the costs of the single operator rules
should equal the cost of the complex instruction. If the cost of the operation
is one cycle and it takes two patterns to match it, then they can be assigned
arbitrary nonnegative costs that sum to one, such as 1

2 and 1

2, or 1

4 and 3

4, or 0
and 1. This approach ensures that a low-cost match generates the instruction
sequence with lowest local cost.

The second restriction we impose is that leaves in the tree appear only in
singleton rules, such as rules 17 to 20 and 24. Again, the intent is to simplify
the tree-pattern matcher. For the situation where a NUM needs to move into a
Notice that rule 18 has a code template, but
rule 24 does not.
register, rule 18, Reg ← NUM, accomplishes the task. When the NUM can appear
as an immediate field, it matches rule 24, T3 ← NUM. Here, T3 is an LHS
symbol that only appears in an immediate field of an operation such as addI
or loadAI. If the target ISA supported multiple distinct lengths of immediate
operands, the rule set would include an LHS symbol for each length.

This second restriction avoids special case code in the tree-pattern matcher.
When the matcher considers the children of an operator, it can assume that



■ FIGURE 11.7 A Simple Tree Rewrite Sequence.

those children have already been annotated with type and cost information
by the singleton rules. The code for operators remains simple and uniform.

Either one or both of these restrictions can be discarded, at the cost of addi-
tional complexity in the tree-pattern matcher. In a hand-coded matcher, this
simplicity leads to efficient matchers. An automatically generated, table-
driven scheme may have different cost tradeoffs.

11.4.3 Computing Tilings

Given a rule set that maps the compiler’s IR onto the target machine’s ISA,
the instruction selector must map a specific AST into an instruction se-
quence. To do this, a tree-pattern matching code generator constructs a tiling
of the AST with the tree-patterns from the rule set. Several techniques for
constructing such a tiling exist; they are similar in concept but vary in detail.

To help us understand tiling, consider the AST shown in the margin, a sub-
tree from Fig. 11.1(b). It describes a memory operation that loads a word
from the address at offset 12 from the label @G. Using the rules from
Fig. 11.5, we can find a sequence of rules that tiles the tree.

Fig. 11.7 shows one way to tile this AST. The figure treats the rules as
rewrites to the tree. As shown in panel (a), rule 19 matches the LAB node.
Rule 19 rewrites the LAB as a Reg, shown in panel (b). Rule 24 matches the

NUM node and rewrites it as a T3 to produce the AST shown in panel (c). One
of the matches for +(Reg,T3) in panel (c) is rule 9, which rewrites that sub-
tree as a Reg, as shown in panel (d). Rule 5 matches the AST in panel (d) and
rewrites it as a single Reg node, not shown. We denote this rewrite sequence
as ⟨19,24,9,5⟩; order in the sequence matches the order of rule application.

Rules 19 and 24 can be applied in either order. Thus, the sequence
⟨19,24,9,5⟩ produces the same tiling as ⟨24,19,9,5⟩. The diagram in the
margin summarizes those sequences.



■ FIGURE 11.8 The Set of All Tilings for the Example Subtree.

This tiling implements the AST; it meets the four criteria defined on
page 596. It covers each AST node with one or two operation-tree nodes.
The root of each pattern tree overlaps with a leaf in its parent. For example,
the root of 19 is a leaf in 9. The connections between patterns are compati-
ble and limited to one node in each subtree. Where two operation-tree nodes
cover an AST node, the connected nodes have the same nonterminal label.
Thus, this tiling implements the AST.

Given a valid tiling, the selector generates code using the templates associ-
ated with each rule. The code template consists of zero or more operations
that, together, implement the subtree covered by the rule. For example, the
sequence ⟨19,24,9,5⟩ implies four operations. Rule 19 produces a loadI fol-
lowed by a loadAI; rule 24 generates no code; rule 9 generates an addI; and
rule 5 generates the load. The resulting code appears in the second column
of Fig. 11.8, with abstract register names to create the flow of values. Note
that ⟨24,19,9,5⟩ produces the same code, because rule 24 produces no code.
In general, sequences that differ in the order of rule application may gener-
ate the operations in a different order.

Choosing Among Multiple Tilings

Eight different sequences implement the example AST. Fig. 11.8 shows all
The sequences that use both rules 18 and 19
would generate the two loadIs in different
orders for ⟨18,19⟩ and ⟨19,18⟩.
eight sequences; those that differ only in order appear together. The top row
shows the tilings. The middle row shows the code generated by each tiling
and its cost. The bottom row shows the sequences for each tiling.



Tile(n)
/ * n is an AST node * /

if n is a leaf then

Match(n,* ) ← { rules that implement n }

else if n is a unary node then

Tile(child(n))

Match(n,*) ← ∅
/ * Clear n’s Match sets * /

for each rule r where operator(r) = operator(n) do

if (child(r), child(n)) are compatible then

add r to Match(n, class(r))

else if n is a binary node then

Tile(left(n))

Tile(right(n))

Match(n,*) ← ∅
/ * Clear n’s Match sets * /

for each rule r where operator(r) = operator(n) do

if (left(r), left(n)) and (right(r), right(n)) are compatible then

add r to Match(n, class(r))

■ FIGURE 11.9 Compute All Matches to Tile an AST.

To emit code, the instruction selector must choose one sequence. The obvi-
ous choice is to take the low-cost sequence. If the cost estimates for the rules
reflect actual runtime costs, then the low-cost sequence should be fastest.
Note that the costs can reflect properties other than execution speed. For
example, in an application where code space is critical, a cost metric that
reflects the byte-length of the code sequence might be appropriate.

A Tiling Algorithm

Fig. 11.9 shows a simple recursive algorithm that computes the set of
matches for each node in the tree. To keep the exposition simple, the al-
gorithm assumes that the AST and the rule set consist of nodes with either
zero, one, or two operands.

This restriction allows the algorithm to deal with just three kinds of tree-
patterns: a binary node and its two children, a unary node and its child, or a
leaf node. This limitation keeps the matcher small and efficient.

Tile annotates each node with a vector of rules that match the subtree
rooted at that node. The vector has one element for each LHS symbol in
the rule set. By design, each LHS symbol in the rule set corresponds to a
⟨storage class,type⟩ pair. For a node n, the row Match(n,*) contains all of the
rules that can implement the subtree rooted at n. Match(n,c) shows all of the
rules that can implement the subtree rooted at n, to produce a result in c.



For a leaf node, the set of matches can be precomputed. In our example
Reg
Stmt
T1
T2
T3

18
24

Match Set for NUM Node

rule set, a NUM node always has the Match set shown in the margin. The rules
provide one way to rewrite NUM as a Reg, with rule 18, and one way to rewrite
a NUM as a T3, with rule 24. Each leaf node has its own vector.

For a unary node n, Tile first recurs on n’s child to discover the ways it can
be implemented. It then examines each rule r that implements n’s operator.
If the child has an implementation that is compatible with r marked in its

Match set, then Tile adds r to Match(n, class(r)), where class(r) denotes the

LHS symbol of rule r.

To test compatibility between rule r and the implementations for AST node

n’s child, the algorithm uses a simple test based on the definition of compat-
ibility: the rule and the AST must agree on the operator and on the storage
class and value type of the child. Given an AST subtree o1(x) and a tree pat-
tern o2(y), the two are compatible if and only if (1) the operators in o1 and
o2 are the same; and (2) Match(x, class(y)) is nonempty. The first condition
ensures that the tree pattern and the AST subtree use the same operation.
The second ensures that the child in the AST can be implemented with a
rule that produces the kind of value that rule r uses.

For a binary node n, Tile follows the same plan as for a unary node. It recurs
on both the left and right children in the AST. It tests compatibility between
the left child in the AST and the corresponding term in rule r and the right
child in the AST and the corresponding term in r. If r uses the same operator
as n and r is compatible with the tilings computed for n’s children, then Tile
adds r to Match(n, class(r)).

A Worked Example

Fig. 11.10 shows the results of applying Tile to our continuing example.
Panel (a) shows the AST for a ←b - 2 × c. Nodes in the AST are annotated
with their postorder numbers; Tile traverses the tree in postorder. Panel (d)
shows all of the matches that Tile finds for each node. Superscripts on the
rule numbers indicate the lowest cost for each entry. The low-cost entry in
the row is set in bold text.

To gain a feel for the algorithm, consider the subtree that starts with node 13,
which is the example from Fig. 11.8. In postorder, Tile will compute the

Match sets for nodes 10 and 11. As leaves, these are precomputed sets. The
only rule that applies to a LAB is rule 19, which rewrites LAB with Reg. The
table entry reflects that fact. Similarly, the entry for node 11 is the Match
set shown earlier, which indicates that rule 18 rewrites a NUM into a Reg, and
rule 24 rewrites a Num into a T3.



■ FIGURE 11.10 Results of Running Tile on the Low-Level AST for a ←b - 2 × c.



For node 12, Tile finds four possibilities. It can produce a Reg for the addition,
using either rule 8 or rule 9. It can produce a T1 using rule 21, or it can
produce a T2 using rule 22. As shown in Fig. 11.8, each of those choices
dictates specific matches for nodes 10 and 11.

Finally, for node 13, Tile finds three choices: rules 5, 6, and 7. Each of these
rewrites the subtree with a Reg. A top-down walk in the AST subtree, choos-
ing a compatible set of rules from Match will generate the sequences shown
in Fig. 11.8.

Accounting for Costs

Given the set of matches and the costs for each rule, the compiler can
compute the least cost choice in each category, during a simple postorder
traversal. It accumulates costs for each category, bottom up, by determining
the cost for a specific rule choice as the rule’s own cost, plus the cost of the
choices at subtrees that the rule requires. The matcher can compute the cost
for each rule choice and keep the smallest one for each category.

The cost computation can be folded into Tile, as shown in Fig. 11.11. The
code is a straightforward extension of Fig. 11.9.

The table in Fig. 11.10(d) shows where, during the matching process,
choices occur. Consider node 3. Two patterns match the subtree to produce
a value of type Reg. Rule 8 has a total cost of 2: 1 for itself, plus 0 for a
Reg at node 1 and 1 for a Reg at node 2. Rule 9 has a total cost of 1: 1 for
itself, plus 0 for a Reg at node 1 and 0 for a T3 at node 2. The cost-driven
algorithm will keep the match to rule 9. In addition to these matches for Reg,
one pattern matches the subtree to produce each of T1 and T2. The low-cost
among these matches for node 3 is rule 22, which produces a T2.

By the time the matcher finishes, it has annotated each node with the rule
that produces the low-cost match. These matches are shown in Fig. 11.10(b).
The instruction selector can then emit code in a bottom-up, postorder pass
over the tree. Fig. 11.10(c) shows the resulting code, with appropriate reg-
ister names used to tie together the various code templates.

This process yields, at each point, a rule choice that produces a minimal cost
Local optimality
A scheme in which the compiler has no
better alternative, at each point in the code,
is considered locally optimal.
code sequence in some local neighborhood in the tree. The literature refers
to this property as local optimality.

Local optimality does not guarantee that the solution is optimal from a
broader perspective, such as the entire procedure or the entire program. In
general, compilers cannot efficiently consider all the details that would be
necessary to achieve global optimality.



Tile(n)
/ * n is a node in an AST * /

if n is a leaf node then

Match(n,* ).rule ← { low-cost rule that matches n, in each class }

Match(n,* ).cost ← { corresponding cost }

else if n is a unary node then

Tile(child(n))

Match(n ,*).rule ← invalid

Match(n ,*).cost ← largest integer

for each rule r where operator(r) = operator(n) do

if (child(r), child(n)) are compatible then

NewCost ← RuleCost(r) + Match(child(n),class(child(r))).cost

if (Match(n,class(r)).cost > NewCost) then

Match(n,class(r)).rule ← r

Match(n,class(r)).cost ← NewCost

else if n is a binary node then

Tile(left(n))

Tile(right(n))

Match(n ,*).rule ← invalid

Match(n ,*).cost ← largest integer

for each rule r where operator(r) = operator(n) do

if (left(r), left(n)) and (right(r), right(n)) are compatible then

NewCost ← RuleCost(r) + Match(left(n), class(left(r))).cost

+ Match(right(n), class(right(r))).cost

if (Match(n,class(r)).cost > NewCost) then

Match(n,class(r)).rule ← r

Match(n,class(r)).cost ← NewCost

■ FIGURE 11.11 Compute Low-Cost Matches to Tile an AST.

Notice how different the final code is for the three variable references. The
store to a, at offset 4 from the ARP, folds completely into a single storeAI
operation. The load from b, a call-by-reference parameter whose pointer
is 16 bytes before the ARP requires a subI and two load operations; the
address-offset address mode only handles positive offsets, and the call-by-
reference binding leads to an extra load. Finally, the load from c, a global
variable stored at offset 12 from a label, requires a loadI to find the con-
stant pool, followed by two loadAI operations. The first loadAI fetches the
address of the label stored at @CP + @G, and the second fetches the value at
offset 12 from that address. At the source level, all three references look
textually similar; the code generated for them is not.



TREE-PATTERN MATCHING ON QUADS?
The terms used to describe these techniques—tree-pattern matching and
peephole optimization—contain implicit assumptions about the kinds of IR
to which they can be applied. The description of tree-pattern matching
selectors implies that the selector operates on a tree-shaped IR. Similarly,
peephole optimizers were first proposed as a final assembly-to-assembly
improvement pass. The idea of a moving instruction window strongly
suggests a linear, low-level IR for a peephole selector.

Both techniques can be adapted to fit most IRs. A compiler can interpret a
low-level linear IR like ILOC as trees. Each operation becomes a tree node;
the edges are implied by the reuse of operands. Similarly, if the compiler
assigns a name to each node, it can interpret trees as a linear form by
performing a postorder treewalk. A clever implementor can adapt the
methods presented in this chapter to a wide variety of actual IRs.

As a final point, notice that the tree-pattern matching selector folds the con-
stant two into the multiply operation. Recall that the peephole selector was
unable to perform that rewrite because the assignment of two to r1 and the
use of r1 in the multiply were too far apart for the simplifier to see the oppor-
tunity. By contrast, the tree-pattern matcher encodes the fact that the subtree
has a constant value and carries it along in the set of possible matches to the
point where the decision between a mult and a multI occurs.

11.4.4 Tools

As we have seen, a tree-oriented, bottom-up approach can produce efficient
instruction selectors. There are several ways that the compiler writer can
implement code generators based on these principles.

1. The compiler writer can hand code a matcher, similar to Tile, that explic-
itly checks for matching rules as it tiles the tree. A careful implemen-
tation can limit the set of rules examined at each node. This avoids the
large table and leads to a compact code generator.

2. Since the problem is finite, the compiler writer can encode it as a finite
tree-matching automaton, similar to a DFA. In this scheme, the lookup
table encodes the automaton’s transition function and implicitly incor-
porates all the required state information. Multiple systems have used
this approach, often called a bottom-up rewrite system (BURS).

3. The grammar-like form of the rules suggests using parsing techniques,
extended to handle the highly ambiguous grammars that result from ma-
chine descriptions, and to choose least-cost parses.



4. If the compiler linearizes the tree into prefix form, it can use a string-
matching algorithm to find the potential matches.

Practical tools implement each of the last three approaches. The compiler
writer creates a description of a target machine’s instruction set, and a gen-
erator creates executable code from the description.

The automated tools differ in details. The cost per emitted instruction varies.
Some are faster, some are slower; none is slow enough to have a major im-
pact on the speed of the resulting compiler. The approaches allow different
cost models. Some systems restrict the compiler writer to a fixed cost for
each rule; in return, they can perform some or all of the analysis during ta-
ble generation. Others allow more general cost models where costs may vary
during matching; these systems must manipulate those costs during instruc-
tion selection. In general, however, all these approaches produce instruction
selectors that are both efficient and effective.

SECTION REVIEW
Instruction selection via tree-pattern matching uses trees to represent both
operations in the code and operations on the target machine. The compiler
writer creates a library of tree patterns that map constructs in the compiler’s
IR into operations on the target machine. Each pattern consists of a small IR
pattern-tree, a code template, and a cost. In a single pass, the selector finds
a locally optimal tiling for the tree. A second postorder walk generates the
corresponding code from the templates associated with the tiles.

Several technologies have been used to implement tiling passes. These
include hand-coded matchers, automata-based matchers, parser-based
matchers operating on ambiguous grammars, and linear matchers based
on algorithms for fast string matching. All of these technologies have
worked well in one or more systems. The resulting instruction selectors run
quickly and produce high-quality code.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Tree-pattern matching seems natural for use in a compiler with a tree-
like IR. How might sharing in the tree—that is, using a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) rather than a tree—affect the algorithm?

2.
The examples used a fixed cost for each pattern. How might the com-
piler use the ability to model costs dynamically?

Hint: Can the compiler recognize when
pipelined loads can overlap?



11.5 ADVANCED TOPICS

Both tree-pattern matching and peephole instruction selectors have been de-
signed for compile-time efficiency. Both techniques are limited, however,
by the set of patterns that the compiler writer provides. To find the best
such patterns, the compiler writer might consider using search techniques
to discover the patterns.

The idea is simple. Combinations of instructions sometimes have surpris-
ing effects. Because the results are unexpected, they are rarely foreseen by
a compiler writer and, therefore, are not included in the specification pro-
duced for a target machine. Automatic discovery can reveal new patterns.

Two distinct approaches that use exhaustive search to discover new patterns
have appeared in the literature. The first has a peephole system discover new
patterns as it compiles code. The second applies a brute-force search to the
space of possible instructions.

11.5.1 Learning Peephole Patterns

To speed up peephole optimization, several systems have replaced the sim-
plifier with a pattern-driven rewrite engine. The rewrite engine still operates
over a small sliding window. It simply uses a library of patterns to recognize
opportunities within the window rather than exploring all of the possible
substitutions in each successive window. This approach decreases the time
spent on simplification, but introduces a tradeoff between the size of the
pattern set and the quality of the resulting code.

The tradeoff pits the compiler writer’s time, spent developing the pattern set,
against the quality of code that the instruction selector generates. A larger
pattern set can perform more simplifications, but takes longer to write. A
smaller pattern set can perform fewer simplifications, but takes less time to
write.

Davidson and Fraser built a system that combined a fast pattern-driven
simplifier with an exhaustive simplifier [126]. The compiler writer would
provide an initial set of patterns to port the instruction selector to a new
machine.

One effective way to generate the explicit pattern table needed by a fast,
pattern-matching, peephole selector is to pair it with an optimizer that has
a symbolic simplifier. Each time the simplifier discovers an improvement,
it records both the initial sequence and the simplified sequence. A postpass
checks these discovered patterns to ensure general applicability and records
them for subsequent use.



By running the symbolic simplifier on a training set of applications, the
compiler can discover most of the patterns it needs. Then, the compiler can
use the table as the basis of a fast pattern-matching selector. This lets the
compiler writer expend computer time during design to speed up routine
use of the compiler. It greatly reduces the complexity of the patterns that
must be specified.

Increasing the interaction between the two simplifiers can further improve
code quality. At compile time, the fast pattern matcher will encounter some
LLIR pairs that match no pattern in its table. When this occurs, it can invoke
the symbolic simplifier to search for an improvement, bringing the power
of search to bear only on the LLIR pairs for which it has no preexisting
pattern.

To make this approach practical, the symbolic simplifier should record both
successes and failures. This strategy allows it to reject previously seen LLIR
pairs without the overhead of symbolic interpretation. When it succeeds in
improving a pair, it should add the new pattern to the selector pattern table,
so that future instances of that pair will be handled by the more efficient
mechanism.

This learning approach to generating patterns has several advantages. It ap-
plies effort only on previously unseen LLIR pairs. It compensates for holes
in the training set’s coverage of the target machine. It provides the thorough-
ness of the more expensive system while preserving most of the speed of the
pattern-directed system.

In using this approach, however, the compiler writer must determine when
the symbolic optimizer should update the pattern tables and how to ac-
commodate those updates. Allowing an arbitrary compilation to rewrite the
pattern table for all users seems unwise; synchronization and security is-
sues are sure to arise. Instead, the compiler writer might opt for periodic
updates—storing the newly found patterns and releasing them as part of an
update to the compiler.

11.5.2 Generating Instruction Sequences

The learning approach has an inherent bias: it assumes that the low-level pat-
terns should guide the search for an equivalent instruction sequence. Some
compilers have taken an exhaustive approach to the same basic problem.
Instead of trying to synthesize the desired instruction sequence from a low-
level model, they adopt a generate-and-test approach.

The idea is simple. The compiler, or compiler writer, identifies a short se-
quence of assembly-language instructions that should be improved. The



compiler then generates all of the assembly-language sequences of cost one,
substituting the original arguments into the generated sequence. It tests each
one to determine if it has the same effect as the target sequence. When it
has exhausted all sequences of a given cost, it increments the cost of the
sequences and continues. This process continues until (1) it finds an equiva-
lent sequence, (2) it reaches the cost of the original target sequence, or (3) it
reaches an externally imposed limit on either cost or compile time.

While this approach is inherently expensive, the mechanism used for testing
equivalence has a strong impact on the time required to test each candidate
sequence. A formal approach, using a low-level model of machine effects,
is clearly needed to screen out subtle mismatches, but a faster test can catch
the gross mismatches that occur most often. If the compiler simply gener-
ates and executes the candidate sequence, it can compare the results against
those obtained from the target sequence. This simple approach, applied to a
few well-chosen inputs, should eliminate most of the inapplicable candidate
sequences with a low-cost test.

This approach is, obviously, too expensive to use routinely or to use for large
code fragments. In some circumstances, however, it merits consideration. If
the application writer or the compiler can identify a small, performance-
critical section of code, the gains from an outstanding code sequence might
justify the cost of exhaustive search. For example, in some embedded appli-
cations, the performance-critical code consists of a single inner loop. Using
exhaustive search for small code fragments—to improve speed or space—
may be worthwhile.

Similarly, exhaustive search has been applied as part of the process of re-
targeting a compiler to a new architecture. This application uses exhaustive
search to discover particularly efficient implementations for IR sequences
that the compiler routinely generates. Since the cost is incurred when the
compiler is ported, the compiler writer can justify the use of search by amor-
tizing that cost over the many compilations that are expected to use the new
compiler.

11.6 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

At its heart, instruction selection is a pattern-matching problem. The dif-
ficulty of instruction selection depends on the level of abstraction of the
compiler’s IR, the complexity of the target machine, and the quality of code
desired from the compiler. In some cases, a simple treewalk approach will
produce adequate results. For harder instances of the problem, however,
the systematic search conducted by either tree-pattern matching or peep-
hole optimization can yield better results. Creating a handcrafted treewalk



instruction selector that achieves the same results would take much more
work. While these two approaches differ in almost all their details, they
share a common vision—the use of pattern matching to find a good code
sequence among the myriad sequences possible for any given IR program.

Peephole selectors systematically simplify the IR program and match what
remains against a set of patterns for the target machine. Because they lack
explicit cost models, no argument can be made for their optimality. They
generate code for a computation with the same effects as the IR program,
rather than a literal implementation of the IR program. By contrast, tree-
pattern matchers discover low-cost tilings by taking the low-cost choice
at each decision point. The resulting code implements the computation
specified by the IR program. Because of this subtle distinction in the two
approaches, we cannot directly compare the claims for their quality. In prac-
tice, excellent results have been obtained with each approach.

The practical benefits of these techniques have been demonstrated in real
compilers. Both GCC and LCC run on many distinct platforms. The former
uses a peephole selector; the latter uses tree-pattern matching. The use of
automated tools in both systems has made them easy to understand, easy to
retarget, and, ultimately, widely accepted in the community.

Equally important, the reader should recognize that both families of au-
tomatic pattern matchers can be applied to other problems in compilation.
Peephole optimization originated as a technique for improving the final code
produced by a compiler. In a similar way, the compiler can apply tree-pattern
matching to recognize and rewrite computations in an AST. BURS tech-
nology can provide a particularly efficient way to recognize and improve
simple patterns, including the algebraic identities recognized by value num-
bering.

CHAPTER NOTES

Most early compilers used hand-coded, ad-hoc techniques to perform in-
struction selection [27]. With sufficiently small instruction sets, or large
enough compiler teams, this worked. For example, the BLISS-11 com-
piler generated excellent code for the PDP/11, with its limited repertoire
of operations [368]. The small instruction sets of early computers and mini-
computers let researchers and compiler writers ignore some of the problems
that arise on modern machines.

For example, Sethi and Ullman [321], and, later, Aho and Johnson [6], con-
sidered the problem of generating optimal code for expression trees. Aho,
Johnson, and Ullman extended their ideas to expression DAGs [7]. Com-


ChapterNotes
615

pilers based on this work used ad-hoc methods for the control structures.
Ertl showed how to use tree parsing to find optimal code sequences for

DAGs [153].

In the late 1970s, two distinct trends in architecture brought the problem of
instruction selection to the forefront of compiler research. The move from
16- to 32-bit architectures precipitated an explosion in the number of opera-
tions and address modes that the compiler had to consider. For a compiler to
explore even a large fraction of the possibilities, it needed a more formal and
powerful approach. At the same time, the nascent Unix operating system be-
gan to appear on multiple platforms. This sparked a natural demand for C
compilers and increased interest in retargetable compilers [217]. The ability
to easily retarget the instruction selector plays a key role in determining the
ease of porting a compiler to new architectures. These two trends started
a flurry of research on instruction selection that started in the 1970s and
continued well into the 1990s [78,79,143,170,176,297,298].

The success of automation in scanning and parsing made specification-
driven instruction selection an attractive idea. Glanville and Graham
mapped the pattern matching of instruction selection onto table-driven
parsing [170,175,177]. Ganapathi and Fischer attacked the problem with
attribute grammars [166].

The first peephole optimizer appears to be McKeeman’s system [268]. Bag-
well [31], Wulf et al. [368], and Lamb [246] describe early peephole sys-
tems. The cycle of expand, simplify, and match described in Section 11.3.1
comes from Davidson’s work [125,128]. Kessler also worked on deriving
peephole optimizers directly from low-level descriptions of target architec-
tures [233]. Fraser and Wendt adapted peephole optimization to perform
instruction selection [164,165]. The machine learning approach described
in Section 11.5.1 was described by Davidson and Fraser [126].

Tree-pattern-matching code generators grew out of early work in table-
driven code generation [10,46,177,195,249] and in tree-pattern matching
[83,204]. Pelegrí-Llopart formalized many of these notions in the theory of

BURS [290]. Subsequent authors built on this work to create a variety of im-
plementations, variations, and table-generation algorithms [162,163,297].
The Twig system combined tree-pattern matching and dynamic program-
ming [3,346].

Massalin proposed the exhaustive approach described in Section 11.5.2
[265]. It was applied in a limited way in the GCC compiler by Granlund
and Kenner [180].



EXERCISES

1.
A peephole selector must deal with control-flow operations that include
Section 11.3
conditional branches, jumps, and labeled statements.

a.
What should a peephole selector do when it brings a conditional
branch into the optimization window?

b.
Is the situation different when it encounters a jump?

c.
What happens with a labeled operation?

d.
What can the optimizer do to improve this situation?

2.
Peephole selectors simplify the code as they select a concrete implemen-
tation for it. Assume that the peephole selector runs before instruction
scheduling and register allocation and that the selector can use an un-
limited set of virtual register names.

a.
Can the selector change the demand for registers?

b.
Can the selector change the set of opportunities for code reordering
that are available to the scheduler?

3.
Build a low-level AST for each of the following expressions, using the
Section 11.4
tree in Fig. 11.1 as a model:

a.
y ← a × b + c × d

b.
w ← a × b × c - 7

Assume that a is at offset 8 from the ARP; b and c are in registers (rb
and rc); d is at offset 12 in the constant pool (which is at @CP); w is at
offset 12 from the ARP; and y is held in a register (ry).

Use the rules from Fig. 11.5 to tile these trees.

4.
In any treewalk instruction selection scheme, the compiler must choose
an evaluation order for the subtrees. That is, at some binary node n, does
it evaluate the left or the right subtree first?

a.
Does the choice of order affect the number of registers required to
evaluate the entire subtree?

b.
How can this choice be incorporated into the bottom-up tree-pattern
matching schemes?

5.
The algorithm in Fig. 11.9 restricts rules to a single operator.

a.
Modify that algorithm so that it can correctly process two-operator
rules such as Reg → ◆ (+ (Reg1, NUM2)).

b.
How do your changes affect the running time of the algorithm?




