Chapter12

Instruction Scheduling

ABSTRACT
The elapsed running time of a set of operations depends heavily on the order
in which those operations are presented for execution. Instruction schedul-
ing reorders the operations in a procedure to reduce the code’s execution
time. The set of legal orders for the operations is constrained by the need to
preserve the flow of values from the original code. The goal is to reduce the
number of cycles, start to finish, required to execute the code.

This chapter introduces the dominant technique for scheduling in compilers:
greedy list scheduling in single basic blocks. Compiler writers use a variety
of schemes to apply list scheduling to larger scopes. The chapter presents
several of these, including superlocal scheduling, trace scheduling, and loop
scheduling.

KEYWORDS
Instruction Scheduling, Dependence Graph, List Scheduling, Trace Schedul-
ing, Software Pipelining

12.1 INTRODUCTION

On many processors, the order in which operations are presented for execu-
tion has a significant effect on the length of time it takes for a sequence of
operations to execute. Different operations take a different number of ma-
chine cycles to complete. On a typical commodity microprocessor, integer
addition and subtraction require fewer cycles than integer division; simi-
larly, floating-point division takes more cycles than floating-point addition
or subtraction. Multiplication usually falls between the corresponding addi-
tion and division operations. The cost of a load from memory depends on
where in the memory hierarchy the loaded value resides at the time that the
load issues.

To help the compiler manage this complex situation, most processors allow
for overlapped execution of operations, albeit under constraints that ensure
predictable answers. To allow operations to execute concurrently, most pro-
cessors provide distinct and independent functional units. To decrease the
time interval between the start of distinct operations, most processors use a



pipelined execution model. Both of these concurrency support mechanisms
increase the complexity of the execution model.

Instruction scheduling is the process of systematically reordering the op-
Issue
A processor issues an operation when it be-
gins the process of decoding and executing
the operation.

A processor usually has a fixed number
of issue slots per cycle, typically one per
functional unit.

erations in a block or a procedure so that they execute in fewer cycles.
The scheduler takes in a partially ordered list of operations in the target
machine’s assembly language; it produces a fully ordered list of the same
operations. It assumes that the code has already been optimized. It does not
try to duplicate the optimizer’s work. Instead, the scheduler packs opera-
tions into the available cycles and functional unit issue slots to reduce idle,
or wasted, cycles.

Conceptual Roadmap

The order in which the processor issues operations has a direct impact on
the speed of execution of that code. Thus, most compilers include an in-
struction scheduler to reorder the final operations in a way that improves
performance. The scheduler’s choices are constrained by the flow of data,
by the delays associated with individual operations, and by the capabili-
ties of the target processor. The scheduler must account for all these factors
if it is to produce a correct and efficient schedule for the compiled code.
Scheduling for single basic blocks is NP-complete under almost any realis-
tic scenario.

The dominant technique for instruction scheduling is a greedy heuristic
called list scheduling. List schedulers operate on straight-line code and use
a variety of priority ranking schemes to guide their choices. Compiler writ-
ers have invented a number of frameworks to schedule over larger regions
in the code than basic blocks; these regional and loop schedulers simply
create conditions where the compiler can apply list scheduling to a longer
sequence of operations.

A Few Words About Time

Instruction scheduling is a compile-time activity that tries to improve the
quality of the code that the compiler produces. Like most optimizations,
the scheduler runs at compile time. It analyzes the code and reorders the
operations before they are emitted by the compiler. The benefits of that re-
arrangement accrue at runtime.

Overview

To speed up program execution, processor architects added features such as
pipelined execution, multiple functional units, and out-of-order execution.
These features make processors and their execution models more complex.



They make higher performance possible; they also make realized perfor-
mance more sensitive to the order in which operations are issued. Thus,
they make the instruction scheduler an important factor in the performance
of the final compiled code.

Informally, instruction scheduling is the process whereby a compiler re-
orders the operations in the final code to decrease the number of cycles
required for it to run. The instruction scheduler takes as input a partially or-
dered list of instructions; it produces as output an ordered list of instructions
constructed from the same set of operations. The scheduler assumes a fixed
set of operations; it does not optimize the code. The scheduler assumes that
values in registers remain in registers and values in memory remain in mem-
ory; it does not change storage allocation or storage placement decisions.

The scheduler’s primary goal is to compute an issue order for the opera-
The scheduler tries to minimize the block’s
running time. It cannot, in practice, guaran-
tee an optimal schedule.
tions in a block such that (1) operands are available when needed, (2) the
functional units are well utilized, and (3) the number of cycles required to
execute the block is minimized.

Example

Consider the example in Fig. 12.1(a) that computes (a + a) × b × c × d; this
Schedule length
For a code fragment, its schedule length
is the number of cycles needed for it to
complete execution.

example first appeared in Section 1.3.3. We have substituted concrete num-
bers for the offsets @a, @b, @c, and @d. The column labeled “Start” shows
the cycle in which each operation issues. Assume that the processor has one
functional unit; loads and stores take three cycles; a multiply takes two cy-
cles; and all other operations complete in a single cycle. The original code,
shown in panel (a), executes in 22 cycles, known as it schedule length.

The scheduled code, shown in panel (b), executes in 13 cycles. It separates
long-latency operations from operations that reference their results. This
separation allows operations that do not depend on the results of those long-
latency operations to execute in parallel before those operations finish. The
scheduled code issues load operations in the cycles 1, 2, and 3; the results are
available in cycles 4, 5, and 6, respectively. The overlap among operations
effectively hides the latency of the memory operations. The same approach
hides the latency of the first multiply. The reordered code has a schedule
length of 13 cycles, a 41 percent improvement while executing the same
operations. The increased concurrency requires one extra register.

Roadmap

This chapter examines both the instruction scheduling problem and the algo-
rithms that compilers use to solve it. Section 12.2 discusses both the proces-
sor features that make scheduling hard and the ideas that underlie scheduling



Start
Operations

1
loadAI
rarp, 4
⇒ r1
4
add
r1, r1
⇒ r1
5
loadAI
rarp, 8
⇒ r2
8
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
10
loadAI
rarp, 12 ⇒ r2
13
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
15
loadAI
rarp, 16 ⇒ r2
18
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
20
storeAI r1
⇒ rarp, 4

Start
Operations

1
loadAI
rarp, 4
⇒ r1
2
loadAI
rarp, 8
⇒ r2
3
loadAI
rarp, 12 ⇒ r3
4
add
r1, r1
⇒ r1
5
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
6
loadAI
rarp, 16 ⇒ r2
7
mult
r1, r3
⇒ r1
9
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r1
11
storeAI r1
⇒ rarp, 4

(a) Original Code
(b) Scheduled Code

■ FIGURE 12.1 Example Block from Chapter 1.

algorithms. Section 12.3 introduces list scheduling, the standard framework
that most compilers use. Section 12.4 examines techniques that compiler
writers use to apply that framework to larger domains. The Advanced Top-
ics section examines software pipelining, a technique for scheduling loops.

12.2 BACKGROUND

To compensate for the complex execution models of modern processors and
Schedule length (again)
A block’s schedule length is the number
of cycles that elapse from when the first
operation issues until the last operation
completes.

to capitalize on them, compilers systematically reorder the operations in the
code that they generate. The compiler has multiple goals in this process.
It tries to decrease the number of empty or wasted operation issue slots. It
tries to decrease idle time on the individual functional units. Finally, it tries
to reduce the overall schedule length.

An instruction scheduler analyzes the code to determine how the flow of val-
ues constrains the order of execution. It builds a dependence graph, D, to
Dependence graph
The dependence graph D for block b has
a node for each operation in b and an edge
(x,y) if operation y uses the result of x—that
is, y depends on x.

represent the order constraints induced by the flow of values. The scheduler
reorders the operations, within the constraints expressed in D, to capital-
ize on processor and system resources while hiding, to the extent possible,
processor and system latencies.

To design and implement a scheduler, the compiler writer must understand
the processor’s feature set, the impact that those features have on the perfor-
mance of compiled code, and the ways in which those features present either
challenges or opportunities to the scheduler. This section describes some
of the processor features that complicate scheduling. It then introduces the
scheduling problem.



12.2.1 Architectural Features That Affect Performance

Computer architects have explored and implemented myriad features in-
This section provides an overview of fea-
tures that affect scheduling. For more detail
the reader should consult a textbook on
computer architecture [200].

tended to increase peak processor performance. Some features, such as
pipelined execution, both affect scheduling and rely on scheduling. Others,
such as register windows, have a negligible impact on the design and effec-
tiveness of a scheduler. This section describes three processor features that
interact with scheduling: pipelined execution, variable latency operations,
and multiple functional units.

Unless otherwise stated, we assume that all operations are nonblocking
operations—the processor can issue operations to a functional unit in each
cycle, even if earlier operations are not yet complete. Operations begin ex-
ecution when issued, unless the processor detects that the operation uses a
value that will be defined by another operation that is still executing. When
the processor detects such a pipeline data hazard, it stalls the operation until
its operand is available.

Pipelined Execution

The fundamental unit of time in scheduling is one cycle of the processor’s
clock. Many operations, such as an integer add, an immediate load, or a
logical shift, operate in a single cycle. More complex operations, such as
multiply, divide, branch, jump, and most memory operations, need more
than one cycle to complete. A typical processor can issue one operation per
cycle to each functional unit, so a short cycle time leads to more operations
issued per second.

Multicycle operations are often pipelined; that is, the operation is decom-
A typical operation reads its operands at
the start of the cycle in which it issues and
writes its results at the end of the cycle in
which it completes.

posed into a series of simpler, single-cycle steps that, in sequence, per-
form the complex operation. The pipeline resembles an assembly-line: each
pipeline stage performs part of the operation; at the end of the cycle, the
result passes to the next pipeline stage.

To exploit pipelined execution, the scheduler must understand when in the
The optimizer can increase the amount of
exposed instruction level parallelism in the
code. See, for example, Section 8.4.2.
pipeline an operation reads the values that it uses and when it writes the
values that it defines. Ideally, the scheduled code issues each operation after
its operands are available. To allow the scheduler to fill all of the issue slots
while delaying each operation until its arguments are ready, the code must
have sufficient instruction-level parallelism (ILP).

Variable Latency Operations

Some operations have unpredictable latencies. The latency of a load opera-
tion or a store operation, for example, depends on the state of the processor’s
memory hierarchy. Some implementations of multiplication and division



WHAT HAPPENS WHEN AN OPERAND IS NOT READY?
In some situations, a processor will try to execute an operation before all of
its operands are ready. The following sequence demonstrates the problem.
Assume that the processor issues the mult and the add in consecutive cycles.

mult
r1,r2 ⇒ r3
add
r1,r3 ⇒ r4

If add takes one cycle and mult takes three cycles, then the value of r3 is not
available when the add issues. The processor can detect such a data hazard
before it issues an operation by comparing the names of the arguments to
the names that will be defined by operations that are still in execution.

Most processors stall the new operation until the argument is available.
Processors differ, however, on the impact of a stall.

■
Statically Scheduled, or In-Order, Processors
Once the need for a stall is
detected, these processors stop issuing additional operations until the
hazard clears. Some processors stall just the one functional unit; others
stall all the functional units.

■
Dynamically Scheduled, or Out-of-Order, Processors
These processors
maintain a window into the instruction stream and issue operations as
their arguments become ready, with preference to operations early in
the window.

The scheduler should place operations into cycles where they can execute
without a stall. In the example, it could schedule two independent
operations between the mult and the add, if such operations were available.

A few processors have relied on the compiler to detect and mitigate data
hazards. While this approach may simplify the hardware, it can complicate
the scheduler. In such a scheme, the compiler may need to insert nops to
enforce temporal separation between operations.

have small variations in latency based on the bit-patterns of their arguments.
If the operation has a maximum latency, the scheduler can use that latency
and produce a safe schedule.

For memory operations, the maximum latency is often impractically long
for use in scheduling. Consider a tight eight-operation loop that contains
a load operation. If the load can take anywhere from two cycles (a hit in
the first-level cache) to 100 cycles (a miss to RAM), then using the 100
cycle latency will produce many idle cycles if the load operations exhibit
even modest locality. Thus, the scheduler should estimate some reasonable
expected latency and rely on the hardware to detect incomplete operations
and stall their successors.



Multiple Functional Units

To increase the number of operations per second that the processor can
execute, architects build processors with multiple functional units. Each
functional unit can initiate execution of an operation in each cycle. To keep
multiple functional units busy, the compiler must issue multiple indepen-
dent operations in the same cycle, again exploiting ILP. The scheduler must
understand both the resources available—the number of functional units and
the sets of operations that each can execute—and the dispatch discipline that
determines how the processor issues operations.

Superscalar processors have a single instruction stream. At each cycle, the
Superscalar
a processor that has one instruction stream
and multiple functional units, and that
issues multiple operations per cycle

processor looks at the instruction stream and issues as many consecutive
operations as it can. Consider a simple two functional unit, in-order proces-
sor. At each cycle, it would pick the first operation in the window and issue
it. It would then examine the next operation; if that operation can issue on
the unused functional unit, the processor issues it. If not, the functional unit
remains idle in the current cycle. An out-of-order processor has a larger
window and looks at successive operations until it finds one that can issue
without a hazard.

By contrast, a very-long instruction-word (VLIW) processor manages the
VLIW processor
A very-long instruction-word processor has
an instruction format with a slot for each
functional unit in each cycle.

A packed VLIW processor has a variable-
length instruction word that can hold up to
one operation for each functional unit.

operation issue process by encoding one operation per functional unit into
each instruction. This strategy simplifies the process of selecting and issu-
ing operations. Instead, the compiler must fully specify the operation-issue
behavior of the program. A VLIW instruction may represent idle operations
(nops) implicitly or explicitly.

Many variations exist between these two endpoints. Superscalar processors
vary from strictly in-order processors to out-of-order processors with large
lookahead windows. Some VLIW processors have long instruction words,
but allow the instructions to vary in length to save code space. In order to
plan execution time behavior, the scheduler must understand the processor’s
instruction dispatch discipline.

The diversity of dispatch mechanisms blurs the distinction between an op-
eration and an instruction. On VLIW and packed VLIW machines, an in-
struction contains multiple operations. On superscalar machines, we usually
refer to a single operation as an instruction and describe these machines as
issuing multiple instructions per cycle. Throughout this book, we use the
term operation to describe a single opcode and its operands. We use the
term instruction to refer to an aggregation of one or more operations that all
issue in the same cycle. In deference to tradition, we still refer to this chap-
ter’s problem as instruction scheduling, although it might be more precisely
called operation scheduling.



■ FIGURE 12.2 Dependence Graph for the Example.

12.2.2 The Instruction Scheduling Problem

The instruction scheduling problem is defined over a basic block and its de-
pendence graph, D. Nodes in D represent operations in the block. Edges
in D represent the flow of values between those operations. Edges are di-
rected; the edge (x,y) indicates that operation y uses the value produced by
operation x. Additionally, each node has two attributes, a type and a delay.
For a node n, the operation corresponding to n must execute on a functional
unit specified by type(n). That operation requires delay(n) cycles to com-
plete. Fig. 12.2 shows the code for our running example and its dependence
graph.

D is a forest of reversed directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). Thus, we use DAG
Edges in D show the flow of values. If we
reversed the edges, D would form a forest
of DAGs.

We draw D with roots at the bottom, so that
the drawing reflects the order of the code.

terminology to describe D. Nodes without predecessors, such as a, c, e, and
g in the example, are leaves. Leaves can be scheduled as early as possible,
because they depend on no other operations. Nodes without successors, such
as node i in the example, are roots. Roots can only be scheduled after all of
their predecessors have completed.

Given a dependence graph D for a block, a schedule S maps each node n
Assume, for the moment, that all opera-
tions have known delays. A discussion of
scheduling with variable delays starts on
page 636.

to a nonnegative integer that denotes the cycle in which it should be issued,
assuming that the first operation issues in cycle 1. Thus, the ith instruction
contains the set of operations { n | S(n) = i }. A valid schedule must meet
three constraints.

1. S(n) ≥ 1, for each n ∈ N. This constraint forbids operations that issue be-
fore execution starts. A schedule that violates this constraint is not well
formed. For the sake of uniformity, the schedule must also have at least
one operation n′ with S(n′) = 1.



2. If (n1, n2) ∈ E then S(n1) + delay(n1) ≤ S(n2). This rule enforces cor-
rectness. An operation should not issue until its operands have been
defined. Some processors expect the compiler to insert nops to enforce
this constraint. Others relax it and use hardware interlocks to delay an
operation until its operands are available.
3. Each instruction contains no more operations of each type t than the
target machine can issue in a cycle. This constraint enforces feasibility.
It ensures that no instruction over-subscribes the functional units.

Given a well-formed, correct, and feasible schedule, the schedule length is
simply the cycle number in which the last operation completes, assuming
the first instruction issues in cycle 1. Schedule length can be computed as:

L(S) = max
n∈N (S(n) + delay(n) − 1).

If delay accurately captures the operation latencies, schedule S should exe-
cute in L(S) time. (Variable latency operations might introduce inaccuracies
into delay.) A schedule Si is time optimal if L(Si) ≤ L(Sj) for all other
schedules Sj that contain the same set of operations.

Schedule Quality

Schedule length is the classic measure of schedule quality. With fixed la-
tency operations, schedule length accurately reflects execution time. With
variable latency operations, the actual cost of the operation depends on dy-
namic factors. As long as the scheduler uses consistent assumptions, the
lengths of different schedules should be comparable.

Schedules can be measured in terms other than time. Two schedules Si
and Sj for the same block might produce different demands for registers If
the processor requires the scheduler to insert nops for idle functional units,
then two schedules may differ in the number of operations fetched. Finally,
Sj might require less energy than Si to execute on the target system because
it never uses one of the functional units, it fetches fewer instructions, or it
causes fewer bit transitions in the processor’s fetch and decode logic.

What Makes Scheduling Hard?

The fundamental task of a scheduler is to assign each operation in the block
a cycle in which it will issue. For each cycle, it builds a set of operations. As
it does so, the scheduler must ensure that each operation issues only when its
operands are available. If the processor has hardware interlocks to prevent
an operation from reading an undefined value, then the schedule can issue
an operation earlier—once all the operations that compute its operands have
issued. That operation, however, will stall until the operands are ready.



MEASURING RUNTIME PERFORMANCE
The primary goal of instruction scheduling is to improve the running time of
the generated code. Because this chapter covers scheduling algorithms, our
focus is on schedule length. However, discussions of performance use many
different metrics.

■
Instructions per Second
This metric measures operations retired per
second. Its common use is to state hardware peak performance; it can
be used to state application performance.

■
Cycles per Instruction (CPI)
This metric divides elapsed time, in cycles,
by operations retired. For a fixed stream of operations, a smaller CPI
indicates better performance.

■
Benchmarks
These metrics measure the elapsed time to complete a
known set of tasks. They provide information about overall system
performance on a particular workload.

Performance measures provide insight into the quality of code generated by
the compiler. They do not, in general, provide enough detail to allow
compiler writers to determine where to focus their effort. A high CPI value
might arise from the structure of the code, from a poor scheduling heuristic,
or from insertion of excessive spill code by the register allocator. (Spill
operations often have multicycle latencies.)

To manage processor resources, the scheduler faces conflicting goals. To
achieve high performance it should keep the functional units busy. To hide
the latencies of multicycle operations, it should overlap the execution of
independent operations. The scheduler should schedule variable-latency op-
erations, such as loads, early relative to their uses. Each of these goals is
important; all consume the same finite resource: available ILP in the code.
The scheduler must tradeoff between these competing goals.

When the scheduler places an operation i in cycle c, that decision affects
the earliest possible placement of any operation that relies on the result
of i—any operation in D that is reachable from i. If more than one oper-
ation can legally execute in cycle c, then the scheduler’s choice can change
the earliest placement of many operations—all those operations dependent
(either directly or transitively) on each of the possible choices.

Local instruction scheduling is NP-complete for all but the simplest archi-
tectures. In practice, compilers approximate good solutions to scheduling
problems using greedy heuristics. Most of the scheduling algorithms used
in compilers are based on a single family of heuristic techniques, called list
scheduling. The following section describes list scheduling in detail. Subse-
quent sections show how to extend the paradigm to larger scopes.



SECTION REVIEW
The advent of pipelined execution, nonblocking operations, variable latency
operations, and multiple functional units makes code performance sensitive
to the order in which operations are issued. The compiler’s instruction
scheduler analyzes the dependence and latency structure of the code and
reorders operations to improve execution time while preserving the code’s
original meaning.

Instruction scheduling is a hard problem that involves low-level details of
the target architecture. It is also a computationally complex problem.
Instruction scheduling straight-line code is NP-complete for almost any
realistic architecture. Thus, most compilers use a greedy heuristic technique,
list scheduling, to solve the problem.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
The Texas Instruments C6X series of processors introduced a multicycle

nop. The operation took a single argument: the number of consecutive
cycles that it should idle the functional unit.

What advantages might a multicycle nop provide? How might the
scheduler capitalize on the availability of this operation?

2.
Assume that load operations are nonblocking with latency k, so that
one load takes k cycles, but two loads, issued in successive cycles, take
k + 1 cycles.

Should this observation affect instruction selection? How might the al-
gorithms in Chapter 11 account for this effect?

12.3 LOCAL SCHEDULING

List scheduling is a greedy, heuristic paradigm. Since the late 1970s, it has
been the dominant technique that compilers use to schedule instructions,
largely because it discovers reasonable schedules and it adapts easily to new

ISAs. However, list scheduling is an approach rather than a specific algo-
rithm. Wide variation exists in both implementations and detailed heuristics.
This section explores the basic list scheduling framework, as well as a cou-
ple of variations on the scheme.

List scheduling operates on a block’s dependence graph. It annotates D with
latency and priority information. It then uses the annotated graph to con-
struct, cycle by cycle, a schedule for the block that the graph represents.



The dependence graph captures most of the schedule-critical properties of
Critical path
the longest latency path through D
a block. The figure in the margin repeats the graph from Fig. 12.2(b). For
a node n, the path length from n to the root is shown as a superscript on n.
(If D had multiple roots, the scheduler would use the maximal path length
to a root.) The superscripts show that the path abdfhi is the critical path
through D; it determines the block’s minimal execution time.

How, then, should the compiler schedule this computation? Each operation
should be placed in a cycle where its operands are available. Since a, c, e,
and g are leaves, they are the initial candidates for scheduling. The fact that a
lies on the critical path suggests that it be scheduled into the first cycle. Once
a has been scheduled, the longest path remaining in D is cdfhi, suggesting
that c issue in the second cycle. Given the prefix ac, b and e tie for latency.
However, b depends on the result of a, which will not be available until cycle
four. Thus, eb is a better suffix to ac than is be. Continuing in this fashion
leads to the schedule acebdgfhi, the schedule shown in Fig. 12.1(b).

Simply choosing that schedule, however, is not enough The operations for
To fix this conflict, the code in Fig. 12.1(b)
renamed the value defined by e and used by
f from r2 to r3.
nodes c and e both define r2; d, in turn, uses the value from c. The scheduler
cannot move e before d unless it renames the result of e to avoid the conflict
with c’s definition of r2. The dependence graph fails to capture this conflict
because it arises from the fact that executing e overwrites the value, rather
than from the flow of a value.

Ordering constraints such as the one between c and e are called antide-
Antidependence
Operation x is antidependent on operation
y if x precedes y and y defines a value used
in x. Reversing their order of execution
could cause x to compute a different value.

pendences. We denote the antidependence between e and d as e→Ad. The
scheduler must respect the antidependences in the original code. The ex-
ample contains four antidependences, namely, e→Ac, e→Ad, g→Ae, and
g→A f. All of them involve redefinition of r2. (Constraints exist based on r1
as well, but each antidependence on r1 duplicates a dependence based on
the flow of values.)

The scheduler has two options to handle this kind of antidependence. It can
SSA form creates a name space that avoids
kills and, thus, many antidependences.
either represent antidependences explicitly and respect them in the same
way that it handles dependences from the flow of values, or it can rename
around them. The former approach restricts the set of schedules that the
compiler can discover. The latter approach increases the size of the name
space, which may force the register allocator to insert spill code into the
block. The local scheduling algorithm that we present assumes that the
scheduler will rename register-based values in the code. The section on
dependence graph construction will provide more details on detecting and
representing antidependences.



12.3.1 The Algorithm

Classic list scheduling operates on a single basic block. To schedule a single
block, the scheduler follows a four-step plan.

1. Rename To avoid antidependences on register-based values, the com-
piler renames them. This step is not strictly necessary, but it simplifies
the scheduler’s implementation.
2. Build a Dependence Graph The scheduler walks the block from bottom
to top. At each operation, it builds a node that represents both the oper-
ation and the value it defines. It then connects that node to the node for
each operation that uses the value.
3. Assign Priorities to Each Operation To guide the choice of operations,
the scheduler computes one or more priorities for each node in D. Pri-
orities are typically computed in a walk over D. The maximum latency-
weighted distance to a root is a common priority scheme.
4. List Scheduling
The scheduler starts in the block’s first cycle and
chooses as many operations as possible to issue in that cycle. It then
increments its cycle counter, updates its notion of which operations are
ready to execute, and schedules the next cycle. It repeats this process
until each operation has been scheduled.

The following subsections explore each of these steps in more detail.

12.3.2 Renaming

The first step in the algorithm renames all unambiguous scalar values in
Recall that a value is ambiguous if the code
can reach it through multiple names (see
Section 4.7.1).
the block so that each name corresponds to a single definition. As a matter
of code shape, we assume that values in registers are unambiguous from
their definition to their last use. The renaming algorithm operates on these
register names. To denote the different name spaces, a name in the original
code is a source name while a name created by renaming is a virtual name.

The compiler can create a virtual-name space with properties that simplify
the task at hand. For example, local value numbering creates a virtual name
space where name identity implies value identity. For scheduling, the re-
naming algorithm creates a name space that eliminates antidependences
between unambiguous scalar values. That name space, in turn, simplifies
the later phases of scheduling.

In a single block, each definition creates a new value. Renaming finds each
such value and assigns it a new virtual name. Within the span between the
value’s definition and its last use, the algorithm rewrites references to the
source name with its virtual name. This process creates a one-to-one corre-
spondence between values and names.



VName ← 0

for i ← 0 to max source-register number do

SToV[i] ← invalid
// initialization

for each Op in the block, bottom to top do

for each definition, O, in Op do
// do defs first

if SToV[O] = invalid then
// invalid def indicates

SToV[O] ← VName++
// an unused value

O ← SToV[O]
// O gets its new name

SToV[O] ← invalid
// next ref is a new name

for each use, O, in OP do
// do uses second

if SToV[O] = invalid then
// start a new value

SToV[O] ← VName++

O ← SToV[O]
// O gets its new name

■ FIGURE 12.3 Renaming for List Scheduling.

The algorithm, shown in Fig. 12.3, discovers values, assigns virtual names,
This algorithm also appears in local register
allocation (see Section 13.3).
and rewrites references in a single backward pass over the block. Its central
data structure is a map, SToV, from source names to virtual names. The al-
gorithm begins by setting all the SToV entries to invalid and initializing the
first virtual name to zero. It then iterates over each operation in the block,
from bottom to top.

At each operation, the algorithm processes definitions before uses. It
In the example, note that all of the names in
a store are uses, not definitions.
rewrites defined names with their virtual names; if a defined name has no
virtual name, its value is not used in the block. It invalidates a virtual name
when it encounters the name’s definition, which forces the next use of that
source name to have its own virtual name. For each of the used names, it
checks SToV to determine if the value has a virtual name; if not, it assigns
the value the next virtual name and rewrites it.

The algorithm processes definitions before uses to ensure correct behavior
when a single operation uses a name and then redefines it. For example,
in an operation such as addI r18, 12 ⇒ r18, the algorithm will first rewrite
the definition with SToV[r18]. Next, it will invalidate SToV[r18]. Then, it will
create a new virtual name and update SToV[r18] with the new name. Finally,
it will rewrite the use with the new name, from SToV[r18].

After renaming, each live range has a unique virtual name. A source name

loadAI
rarp, 4
⇒ r7
add
r7, r7
⇒ r5
loadAI
rarp, 8
⇒ r6
mult
r5, r6
⇒ r3
loadAI
rarp, 12 ⇒ r4
mult
r3, r4
⇒ r1
loadAI
rarp, 16 ⇒ r2
mult
r1, r2
⇒ r0
storeAI r0
⇒ rarp, 4

Example After Renaming

that was defined in multiple operations will be rewritten with multiple dis-
tinct virtual names. The renamed version of the example block appears in
the margin. The antidependences that arose from order of operations in the
input program have been broken; the actual flow of values remains the same.



As discussed in the next subsection, rarp has not been renamed because it is
live across the block boundaries.

The renaming algorithm also plays an important role in local register allo-
cation (see Section 13.3).

End-of-Block Conditions

The algorithm in Fig. 12.3 assumes that the block has no surrounding
context—that is, the block is the entire program. In most situations, a block
b has both predecessors and successors in the control-flow graph. For the
generated code to function correctly in that context, the renaming algorithm
must preserve source names that are live across those boundaries.

Before renaming, the compiler can compute LIVE information (see Sec-
Names are assumed to be represented as
integers. The compiler can use as many
virtual names as it needs.
tions 8.6.1 and 9.2.2). The algorithm then needs three modifications to deal
with the boundary conditions. It should initialize VName to a value higher
than the maximum source-register number. To handle successor blocks, it
should initialize SToV to i for any name i ∈ LIVEOUT(b). These two steps en-
sure that values in LIVEOUT have the names expected by successor blocks.

Handling boundaries with predecessor blocks is slightly more complex.
Before the algorithm assigns a new VName to some source name, it must
determine whether that value is defined in the current block or in some pre-
decessor block. Because the input code can define names multiple times,
checking LIVEIN(b) is insufficient. Instead, the compiler must determine
whether the current use is upward exposed.

During LIVE analysis, the compiler computes the set of upward exposed
variables in b, UEVAR(b). As it does so, it can mark any upward exposed
uses. Then, when the renaming algorithm encounters a use of name i such
that SToV[i] is invalid, it can assign i to SToV[i] if the use is upward exposed,
rather than VName.

12.3.3 Building the Dependence Graph

The second step in the local scheduling process builds a dependence graph,
D, for the basic block. The algorithm, shown in Fig. 12.4 is straightforward.
It creates an empty map, M, that takes virtual names from the code into
If names are small integers, M can be imple-
mented as a vector.
nodes in D. It then iterates over the operations in the block, from top to
bottom. For each operation, O, it creates a node n in D. It updates M so that
M(d) = n, for each name d defined by O. It then adds edges from n to the
nodes that define the values used in O.

The final step adds edges to represent antidependences through memory lo-
Recall that renaming eliminated antidepen-
dences among unambiguous scalar names.
cations and ensure that the final schedule respects them. The idea is simple.



create an empty map, M
// definitions to nodes

create a node, undef, in D
// for an undefined value

for each operation O, top to bottom do
// walk the block

create a node n for O, in D
// n represents O

for each name, d, defined in O do

set M(d) to n

for each name, u, used in O do
// true dependence

if M(u) is undefined then

set M(u) to undef

add an edge (n,M(u)) to D

if O is a memory operation then
// antidependences

add serialization edges as needed

■ FIGURE 12.4 Building the Dependence Graph After Renaming.

If an operation might change the contents of memory, the scheduler must
ensure that the operation does not affect values seen by other operations.
The details are slightly complex.

Consider, for example, the three operation code fragment shown in the mar-
load
r17 ⇒ r5
load
r18 ⇒ r6
store r7
⇒ r17

gin. The scheduler can reorder the two loads; neither modifies the contents
of the memory so changing their relative issue order has no effect on the val-
ues placed in r5 and r6. The store, however, changes the contents of memory.
In the absence of information about the addresses in the loads and stores,
Serialization edge
An edge that represents an antidependence
is a serialization edge.
the scheduler must ensure that the loads read from memory before the store
writes to memory. The compiler may need to add edges to D to serialize
these operations.

The first load uses the same address as the store; the compiler must schedule
these operations so that the load reads its value before the store overwrites
that value. The second load uses a different register as its address. If the
compiler can prove that r17 and r18 always have distinct values, then the
scheduler can reorder the store and the second load. If the compiler can-
not prove those values distinct, it must preserve the relative ordering of the
second load and the store, as well.

The table in Fig. 12.5 summarizes the situations that can arise. The sched-
uler can always swap the order of two loads. With a load and a store, it must
preserve their original order; it must serialize the operations. The table de-
notes this delay as serial. With a store followed by a load, the scheduler must
ensure that the store completes before the load issues; in general, it must
allow the full latency of the store.



Conflict Type
First Op
Second Op
Delay

Read After Read (RAR)
load
load
none

Write After Read (WAR)
load
store
serial

Read after Write
(RAW)
store
load
store

Write after Write (WAW)
store
store
serial

■ FIGURE 12.5 Serialization Latencies for Memory Operations.

Given a pair of memory references, the compiler must enforce the appropri-
ate delay, unless it can prove that the two operations refer to disjoint loca-
tions in memory. In terms of dependence graph construction, the compiler
must add an edge to represent these constraints, weighted with the appro-
priate latency. The compiler can reduce the number of antidependences that
it must represent by analyzing the values of the memory addresses.

12.3.4 Computing Priorities

To guide scheduling decisions, the compiler computes one or more priority
values for each operation. When the scheduler confronts a choice, it takes
the operation with the highest priority value. The scheduler needs a tie-
breaking strategy; a common approach uses a second or third priority value.
The literature discusses many priority schemes; one often used scheme is
the operation’s maximum latency-weighted distance to a root in D.

Priorities such as latency-weighted depth, number of descendants, breadth-
first order, and depth-first order can be computed in a traversal of D. The
scheduler can incorporate other heuristics, such as a preference for loads
over stores, with simple numerical manipulations of the priority scores.

Multiple priorities can be accommodated as a linear combination. If p1
and p2 are scores from different priority metrics, the scheduler can com-
bine them as α · p1 + β · p2 to create a single value. If α ≫ β, the effect
is to use p2 to break ties in the p1 metric. Alternatively, the compiler can
restrict α + β = 1 and tune the values of α and β for the best result across a
training set of codes.

Using lower-weight priorities to break ties can push the schedule toward
specific goals. For example, using the operation’s latency as a lower-weight
priority pushes long latency operations earlier in the block. Using the num-
ber of operands that are last uses as a lower-weight priority can decrease
demand for registers.

Some priority schemes are hard to encode as numerical weights. For exam-
ple, if the processor restricts certain operations to specific functional units,



Cycle ← 1

Ready ← leaves of D

Active ← ∅

while (Ready ∪ Active ̸= ∅) do

for each functional unit, f, do

if there is an op in Ready for f then

let O be the highest priority op
// choose O by priority

in Ready that can execute on f

remove O from Ready
// schedule O in Cycle

S(O) ← Cycle

Active ← Active ∪ { O }

Cycle ← Cycle + 1
// start next Cycle

for each O ∈ Active do

if S(O) + delay(O) ≤ Cycle then
// update Ready list

remove O from Active

for each successor s of O in D do

if s is ready

then add s to Ready

■ FIGURE 12.6 The List-Scheduling Algorithm.

the compiler writer may want to boost the priority of those operations on
their respective units. Rather than manipulate the priority numbers, the com-
piler writer can track the restricted and unrestricted operations separately.
The scheduler can first draw from the restricted list and then, if needed,
from the unrestricted list.

12.3.5 List Scheduling

The final step in scheduling is to construct the actual schedule for the block.
The most widely used algorithm for this part of the process is the list-
scheduling algorithm—a greedy heuristic that, in practice, constructs good
schedules. Fig. 12.6 shows the basic algorithm.

The algorithm performs an abstract simulation of the block’s execution. It
ignores the details of values and operations to focus on the timing con-
straints imposed by edges in D. To track time, it maintains a simulation
clock, in the variable Cycle. It initializes Cycle to 1 and increments Cycle as it
proceeds through the block.

The algorithm uses two lists to track operations. The Ready list holds all
the operations that are “ready” to execute in the current cycle; that is, their
operands have already been computed. Initially, Ready contains all the leaves



of D, since they do not depend on other operations in the block. The Active
list holds all operations that were issued in an earlier cycle but have not yet
completed execution.

The list-scheduling algorithm follows a simple discipline. Each iteration of
the scheduler begins in some specific cycle. It examines the Ready list and
tries to select an operation for each functional unit. If more than one op-
eration is available for some unit, it chooses the operation with the highest
priority score. After it has considered all units, the scheduler increments
Cycle and updates the Ready list.

To update Ready for the new cycle, the scheduler first finds all of the opera-
Operation O completes at the end of cycle
S(O) - first + delay(O).
tions in Active that completed in the previous cycle. For each such completed
operation, the scheduler checks each successor s in D to determine if s is
now ready to execute. More precisely, it determines if all of the operands
used by s are available—that is, the operation that produced the operand
has, itself, completed execution.

The process terminates when the simulated clock reaches the first cycle
where every operation has completed. If all operands of the leaves of D
are available in the first cycle, and delay(op) accurately reflects the execu-
tion time of op, then the simulated clock should match the actual execution
time, in cycles. A simple postpass can emit the operations in order and insert
nops if needed.

The algorithm must respect one final constraint. Any block-ending branch or
jump must be scheduled so it does not complete execution before the block
ends. If i is the block-ending branch, it cannot be scheduled earlier than
cycle L(S) + 1 − delay(i). Thus, a single-cycle branch must be scheduled in
the last cycle of the block, and a two-cycle branch must appear no earlier
than the second to last cycle.

The quality of the schedule produced by this algorithm depends primarily
on the mechanism used to pick an operation from the Ready list. Consider
the simplest scenario, where the Ready list contains at most one item in
each iteration. In this restricted case, the algorithm must generate an optimal
schedule. Only one operation can execute in the first cycle. (There must be at
least one leaf in D, and our restriction ensures that there is exactly one.) At
each subsequent cycle, the algorithm has no choices to make—either Ready
contains an operation and the algorithm schedules it, or Ready is empty and
the algorithm schedules nothing to issue in that cycle.

The difficulty arises when, in some cycle, the Ready list contains multiple
operations. Then, the scheduler must choose among several ready opera-
tions and that choice is critical. The algorithm takes the operation with



INTERACTIONS BETWEEN SCHEDULING AND ALLOCATION
Antidependences between operations can limit the scheduler’s ability to
reorder operations. The scheduler can avoid antidependences by renaming;
however, renaming creates a need for the compiler to perform register
allocation after scheduling. This example is but one of the interactions
between instruction scheduling and register allocation.

The core function of the scheduler is to reorder operations. Since most
operations both use and define values, changing the relative order of two
operations can change the lifetimes of values. Moving an operation
x ← y + z forward can increase the lifetimes of y and z and decrease the
lifetime of x. Symmetrically, moving the operation backward can shrink the
lifetimes of y and z while lengthening the lifetime of x. The net impact of
reordering operations on register demand depends on detailed information
about the lifetimes of the definitions and uses.

In a similar way, register allocation can change the instruction-scheduling
problem. The core functions of a register allocator are to rename references
and to insert spill code. Both of these functions affect the scheduler’s ability
to produce fast code. When the allocator maps a large virtual name space to
the smaller name space of target-machine registers, it can introduce
antidependences that constrain the scheduler. Similarly, when the allocator
inserts spill code, it adds operations to the code that must, themselves, be
scheduled into instructions.

We know, mathematically, that solving these problems together might
produce solutions that cannot be obtained by running the scheduler
followed by the allocator or the allocator followed by the scheduler.
However, both problems are complex enough that most real-world
compilers treat them separately.

the highest priority score. A well-designed priority scheme incorporates
lower-priority tie-breaking criteria. The metric suggested earlier, maximum
latency-weighted distance to a root, corresponds to always choosing the
operation on the critical path for the current cycle in the schedule being con-
structed. To the extent that the impact of a scheduling priority is predictable,
this scheme should provide balanced pursuit of the longest paths.

Scheduling Operations with Variable Delays

The latency of memory operations often depends on the current state of
the memory hierarchy. Thus, the latency of a specific load operation might
vary from a couple of cycles to hundreds of cycles. Worse yet, a given
operation—that is, the instruction in some specific slot in some specific
block—may have different latencies on successive executions.



for each load operation, l, in the block do

delay(l) ← 1

for each operation i in D do

let Di be the nodes and edges in D independent of i

for each connected component C of Di do

find the maximal number of loads, N, on any path through C

for each load operation l in C do

delay(l) ← delay(l) + delay(i) ÷ N

■ FIGURE 12.7 Computing Delays for Load Operations.

In the absence of detailed knowledge about the addresses being accessed
and the state of the memory hierarchy, the scheduler may not have an ac-
curate estimate of the delay. If it assumes the worst case, it risks idling the
processor for long periods. If it assumes the best case, it will stall the pro-
cessor on a cache miss. In practice, the scheduler must seek some middle
ground.

The compiler can obtain good results by calculating an individual latency
for each load based on the amount of instruction-level parallelism avail-
able to cover the load’s latency. This approach, called balanced scheduling,
schedules the load with regard to the code that surrounds it rather than the
hardware on which it will execute. It distributes the locally available paral-
lelism across loads in the block. This strategy mitigates the effect of a cache
miss by scheduling as much extra delay as possible for each load. It will not
slow down execution in the absence of cache misses.

Fig. 12.7 shows the computation of delays for individual loads in a block.
The algorithm initializes the delay for each load to one. Next, it considers
each operation i in the block’s dependence graph, D. It finds the nodes in D
that are independent of i, called Di. Conceptually, this task is a reachability
problem on D. We can find Di by removing from D every node that is a
transitive predecessor of i or a transitive successor of i, along with any edges
associated with those nodes.

The algorithm then finds the connected components of Di. For each com-
ponent C, it finds the maximum number N of loads on any single path
through C. N is the number of loads in C that can share operation i’s de-
lay, so the algorithm adds delay(i)/N to the delay of each load in C. For a
given load l, the operation sums the fractional share of each independent op-
eration i’s delay that can be used to cover the latency of l. Using this value
as delay(l) produces a schedule that shares the slack time of independent
operations evenly across all loads in the block.



■ FIGURE 12.8 Dependence Graph for a Block from go.

12.3.6 Forward Versus Backward List Scheduling

The list-scheduling algorithm, as presented in Fig. 12.6, moves through the
dependence graph from its leaves to its roots and creates the schedule from
the first cycle in the block to the last. An alternate formulation of the algo-
rithm operates in the opposite direction, moving from roots to leaves and
scheduling from last cycle to first cycle. This version of the algorithm is
called backward list scheduling, and the original version is called forward
list scheduling.

List scheduling, itself, is not particularly expensive. Thus, some compilers
have run the scheduler several times with different combinations of heuris-
tics and kept the best schedule. (The scheduler can reuse the preparatory
work—renaming, building the dependence graph, and computing priori-
ties.) In such a scheme, the compiler should consider using both forward
and backward scheduling.

In practice, neither forward scheduling nor backward scheduling always
wins. The difference between forward and backward list scheduling lies
in the order in which the scheduler considers operations. If the schedule
depends critically on the careful ordering of some small set of operations,
the two directions may produce noticeably different results. If the critical
operations occur near the leaves, forward scheduling might consider them
together, while backward scheduling would need to work its way through
the remainder of the block to reach them. Symmetrically, if the critical op-
erations occur near the roots, backward scheduling might examine them
together, while forward scheduling sees them in an order dictated by de-
cisions made starting at the other end of the block.



Integer
Integer
Memory

1
loadI1
lshift
--

2
loadI2
loadI3
--

3
loadI4
add1
--

4
add2
add3
--

5
add4
addI
store1
6
cmp
--
store2
7
--
--
store3
8
--
--
store4
9
--
--
store5
10
--
--
--

11
--
--
--

12
--
--
--

13
cbr
--
--

Integer
Integer
Memory

1
loadI4
--
--

2
addI
lshift
--

3
add4
loadI3
--

4
add3
loadI2
store5
5
add2
loadI1
store4
6
add1
--
store3
7
--
--
store2
8
--
--
store1
9
--
--
--

10
--
--
--

11
cmp
--
--

12
cbr
--
--

(a) Forward Schedule
(b) Backward Schedule

■ FIGURE 12.9 Schedules for the Block from go.

To make this point concrete, consider the example shown in Fig. 12.8.

Opcode
Delay

loadI
1

lshift
1

add
2

addI
1

cmp
1

cbr
1

store
4

It shows the dependence graph for a basic block found in the SPEC 95
benchmark program go. The compiler added dependences from the store
operations to the block-ending branch to ensure that the memory operations
complete before the next block begins execution. Superscripts on nodes in
the dependence graph give the latency from the node to the end of the block;
subscripts differentiate among similar operations. The example assumes the
operation latencies shown in the margin.

This example came to our attention during a study of list scheduling that
targeted an ILOC machine with two integer functional units and one unit
to perform memory operations. The five store operations take most of the
time in the block. To minimize execution time, the schedule must place the
stores as early as possible.

Forward list scheduling, using latency to the end of the block for prior-
ity, executes the operations in priority order, except for the comparison. It
schedules the five operations with rank eight, then the four rank seven oper-
ations and the rank six operation. It begins on the operations with rank five,
and slides the cmp in alongside the stores, since the cmp is a leaf. If ties are
broken arbitrarily by taking left-to-right order, this produces the schedule
shown in Fig. 12.9(a). Notice that the memory operations begin in cycle 5,
producing a schedule that issues the branch in cycle 13.



WHAT ABOUT OUT-OF-ORDER EXECUTION?
Dynamically scheduled processors, with their support for out-of-order (OOO)
execution, can improve on the static schedule that a compiler produces.
Does OOO execution eliminate the need for compiler-based scheduling?

To understand this issue, it is important to recognize when an OOO
processor can improve on the static schedule. If runtime circumstances are
better than the assumptions made by the scheduler, then OOO hardware
can issue an operation earlier than its position in the static schedule. This
situation can arise at a block boundary if an operand is available before its
worst-case time. It can arise with variable-latency operations, such as loads
and stores. Because the processor can look at actual runtime addresses, an
OOO processor can also disambiguate some load-store dependences that
the scheduler cannot.

However, OOO execution does not eliminate the need for the compiler to
schedule instructions. Because the lookahead window is finite, bad
schedules can defy improvement. For example, a lookahead window of 50
instructions will not let the processor execute a string of 100 integer
instructions followed by 100 floating-point instructions in interleaved
⟨integer, floating point⟩ pairs. It should, however, interleave shorter strings of
operations. OOO execution helps the compiler by improving good, but
nonoptimal, schedules.

Using the same priorities with backward list scheduling, the compiler first
places the branch in the last slot of the block. The cmp precedes it by one cy-
cle, determined by delay(cmp). The next operation scheduled is store1 (by
the left-to-right tie-breaking rule). It is assigned the issue slot on the memory
unit that is four cycles earlier, determined by delay(store). The scheduler
fills in successively earlier slots on the memory unit with the other store
operations, in order. It begins filling in the integer operations, as they be-
come ready. The first is add1, two cycles before store1. When the algorithm
terminates, it has produced the schedule shown in Fig. 12.9(b).

The backward schedule takes one fewer cycle than does the forward sched-
ule. It places the addI earlier in the block, which allows store5 to issue in
cycle 4—one cycle earlier than the first memory operation in the forward
schedule. By considering the problem in a different order, using the same
underlying priorities and tie breakers, the backward algorithm finds a dif-
ferent result.

Why does this happen? The forward scheduler places all the rank-eight op-
erations in the schedule before any rank-seven operations. Even though the
addI operation is a leaf, its lower rank causes the forward scheduler to defer



it. By the time the scheduler runs out of rank-eight operations, other rank-
seven operations are available. By contrast, the backward scheduler places
the addI earlier than three of the rank-eight operations—a result that the
forward scheduler could not consider.

SECTION REVIEW
List scheduling has been the dominant paradigm that compilers have used
for many years. It computes, for each operation, the cycle in which that
operation should issue. The algorithm is reasonably efficient; its complexity
relates directly to the underlying dependence graph. This greedy heuristic
approach, in its forward and backward forms, produces excellent results for
single blocks.

The key data structure for instruction scheduling is the dependence graph.
It represents the flow of data in the block. It is easily annotated with
information about operation-by-operation delays. The dependence graph
directly represents both the constraints and the critical paths in the block.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
The Ready list is one of the most heavily accessed data structures in a list
scheduler. Compare and contrast the costs of implementing Ready as an
ordered list versus a priority queue. How does the expected length of
the Ready list affect the tradeoff?

2.
For each of the following tie-breakers, suggest a rationale.

a.
Prefer operations with operands in registers over ones with imme-
diate operands.

b.
Prefer the operation with the most recently defined operands.

c.
Prefer a load before an operation that computes a value.

12.4 REGIONAL SCHEDULING

To extend list scheduling to larger regions, compiler writers use the same
kinds of strategies that work with value numbering. They construct multi-
block regions that they can treat as a single block and, then, apply the local
scheduling algorithm to those regions. As with superlocal value number-
ing, the compiler must take care on the borders between the multiblock
region and the rest of the procedure being compiled. This section examines
three schemes that compiler writers have used to improve schedule quality:



superlocal scheduling, trace scheduling, and superblock cloning. Each ex-
pands the context to which the compiler applies list scheduling.

12.4.1 Superlocal Scheduling

Recall from Section 8.3 that an extended basic block (EBB) consists of a
set of blocks B1, B2, ..., Bn in which B1 has multiple predecessors and ev-
ery other block Bi has exactly one predecessor, some Bj in the EBB. The
compiler can identify EBBs in a simple pass over the CFG. The CFG shown
in the margin has one large EBB, {B0, B1, B2, B4}, and two trivial EBBs,
{B3} and {B5}. The large EBB has two paths, ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩, and ⟨B0, B4⟩,
The paths share B0 as a common prefix.

To obtain a larger context, the scheduler can treat paths in an EBB, such
as ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩, as if they are single blocks, provided that it accounts for
the shared path prefixes and for any premature exits from those paths. This
Both (B0, B4) and (B1, B5) are premature
exits relative to ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩.
approach lets the compiler apply list scheduling to longer sequences of op-
erations. The effect is to increase the fraction of code that is scheduled
together, which may improve execution times.

To see how shared prefixes and premature exits complicate list scheduling,
Compensation code
code inserted into a block Bi to counteract
the effects of cross-block code motion
along a path that does not include Bi

consider the ways that the scheduler might move operations across block
boundaries in the path ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩ in the example. Such code motion may
require the scheduler to insert compensation code to maintain correctness.

■
The compiler can move an operation forward—that is, later on the path.
For example, it might move an operation i from B0 into B1. While that
decision might speed execution along the path ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩, it removes
i from the path ⟨B0, B4⟩. Unless i is dead along ⟨B0, B4⟩, the scheduler
must correct this situation.

To compensate, the scheduler can insert a copy of i at the head of B4. If
it was legal to move i out of B0, it is legal to place it at the head of B4.
Because ⟨B0, B4⟩ is an EBB path, we know
B4 has only one predecessor.
A dependence that prevents placement of i at the head of B4 would also
prevent its placement in B1. The copy of i in B4 does not lengthen the
path ⟨B0, B4⟩ but it does increase the overall code size.

■
The compiler can move an operation backward—that is, earlier on the
path. For example, it might move an operation j from B1 to B0. While
that decision might speed execution along the path ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩, it adds j
to the path ⟨B0, B4⟩. That placement lengthens the path ⟨B0, B4⟩. It may
also change the values seen in B4.

If j kills some value used in B4, the scheduler must rewrite the code
to make the value available at the head of B4. It could insert code at
the head of B4 to recompute the value; renaming might accomplish the



same effect. In either case, the presence of both j and compensation code
along the path ⟨B0, B4⟩ will lengthen that path.

The mechanics of superlocal scheduling are straightforward. The compiler
selects an EBB. It performs renaming over the region, if necessary. Next,
it schedules each path through the EBB, in order of decreasing execution
frequency. It builds a dependence graph for the entire path and schedules it
ignoring premature exits and recording all cross-block placements. A post-
pass inserts compensation code. It repeats this process until it has scheduled
every block in the EBB. Each block is scheduled exactly once.

When the scheduler processes a path with an already-scheduled prefix, it
leaves that prefix intact. The effect is to prioritize the schedules of hotter
paths over those of cooler paths. If the estimates of future execution fre-
quencies are accurate, this approach may improve overall execution times.

In the example, the scheduler might process ⟨B0, B1, B2⟩. Next, it would
schedule B4 relative to the schedule for B0. Finally, it would schedule the
trivial EBBs, B3 and B5, as singleton blocks.

Mitigating Compensation Code

The scheduler can take steps to limit the impact of compensation code. It
can use live information to avoid some of the compensation code suggested
by forward motion. If the result of the moved operation is not live on entry to
the off-path block, no compensation code is needed on that path. It can avoid
compensation code introduced by backward motion if it prohibits backward
motion into a block b of any operation that defines a name n ∈ LIVEOUT(b).
This restriction can limit the scheduler’s ability to improve the code, but it
avoids lengthening other paths.

12.4.2 Trace Scheduling

Trace scheduling extends the approach taken in superlocal scheduling
Trace
an acyclic path through the CFG selected
using profile information
beyond a path through a single EBB. Trace scheduling constructs maximal-
length acyclic paths, or traces, through the CFG and applies the list-
scheduling algorithm to those traces. Like superlocal scheduling, this
approach schedules each block once. Like superlocal scheduling, it may
need to insert compensation code. The algorithm consists of two distinct
phases: trace construction and scheduling.

The algorithm follows the same basic scheme as superlocal scheduling. It
identifies a trace and schedules that trace—keeping track of places where the
new schedule will need compensation code. It schedules the hottest paths
first, so that the shorter and more constrained schedules execute less often.



■ FIGURE 12.10 Trace Construction Algorithm.

Trace Construction

Fig. 12.10(a) shows the algorithm to construct a single trace. It uses a greedy
heuristic to find the hottest acyclic path through the CFG. It begins with a
trace that consists of the hottest remaining edge in the graph—the one with
highest execution frequency—and repeatedly adds edges to either the start
or the end of the trace. At each step, it takes the hottest edge among the
available choices—those that would extend either the start or the end of the
trace. When no such edge remains, the trace is finished.

The algorithm excludes some edges. It considers an edge ineligible for use
Recall that an edge (x, y) is a loop-closing
edge in the CFG if y ∈ DOM(x).
in the current trace if either the edge closes a loop or both its source and
sink already appear in the current trace or an earlier one.

The first restriction prevents the scheduler from moving code out of a loop.
We assume that the optimizer already performed loop-invariant code motion
(see Section 10.3.1) and that the scheduler should not insert compensation
code that splits a loop-closing branch.

To find successive traces, the compiler removes the on-trace edges from the
graph and invokes the trace construction algorithm on the remaining graph.
It repeats this process until no eligible edges remain.

Examples

Consider the CFG shown in the margin. The algorithm starts with the
hottest edge, (B0, B1). It extends (B0, B1) with (B1, B2) and (B2, B3), in or-
der. At that point, it cannot extend the trace any further. The first trace is
⟨B0, B1, B2, B3⟩. It removes those edges from the graph.

For the second trace, the algorithm starts with (B5, B3). It extends the trace
with (B4, B5) and (B0, B4). It cannot extend the trace further. The second



trace is ⟨B0, B4, B5, B3⟩. It removes those edges. The only remaining edge,
(B1, B5), is ineligible.

Fig. 12.10(b) shows a more complex CFG. Its hottest edge is (B5, B6). It
Note that (B8, B5) is a loop-closing edge
and, therefore, ineligible.
extends the trace with, in order, (B6, B7), (B7, B8), and (B0, B5), to form the
trace ⟨B0, B5, B6, B7, B8⟩.

The second trace begins with a tie for the hottest remaining edge. It chooses
one of (B6, B9) or (B9, B8). It uses the other edge to extend the trace, to form
⟨B6, B9, B8⟩. At that point, no eligible edge remains to extend the second
trace.

The third trace begins with (B4, B3). The algorithm adds (B5, B4) to form
⟨B5, B4, B3⟩. No eligible edge remains to extend this trace.

The fourth trace begins with (B0, B1). The algorithm extends the trace with
(B1, B2) and (B2, B3). At that point, no eligible edges remain. The fourth
trace is ⟨B0, B1, B2, B3⟩. The only edge left in the graph is (B1, B4), which
runs between two traces and is, therefore, ineligible.

Scheduling

Given a trace, the scheduler applies the list-scheduling algorithm to the en-
tire trace, in the same way that superlocal scheduling does. With a trace, one
additional opportunity for compensation code occurs; the trace may have
interim entry points—blocks in mid-trace that have multiple predecessors,
such as B4 in Fig. 12.10(b).

■
Forward motion of an operation i on the trace across an interim entry
point may add i to the off-trace path. If i redefines a value that is also
live across the interim entry, some combination of renaming or recom-
putation may be necessary. The alternative is to either prohibit forward
motion across the interim entry or to use cloning to avoid this situation
(see Section 12.4.3).

■
Backward motion of an operation i across an interim entry point may
force the compiler to add i to the off-trace path. The change is straight-
forward, since i already occurred on the off-trace path. The scheduler
must already correct for any name conflict introduced by the on-trace
backward motion; the off-trace compensation code can simply define
the same name.

If the interim entry comes from a previously scheduled block, the sched-
uler may need to split the entering edge, unless the specific situation can be
handled with renaming. The alternative is to prohibit code motion across in-
terim entries if it forces compensation code into an already scheduled trace.



To schedule an entire procedure, the scheduler first performs renaming over
the entire procedure. Next, it repeatedly discovers a new trace and schedules
it, until it cannot construct another trace. To schedule an individual trace, it
builds a dependence graph for the trace, computes priorities, and performs
list scheduling on the trace. The process continues until all the blocks have
been scheduled.

Superlocal scheduling can be considered a degenerate case of trace schedul-
ing in which interim entries to the trace are prohibited.

12.4.3 Cloning for Context

Join points in the control-flow graph can limit the opportunities for either
superlocal scheduling or trace scheduling. To improve the results, the com-
piler can clone blocks to create longer join-free paths. Superblock cloning
has exactly this effect (see Section 10.6.1). For superlocal scheduling, it in-
creases the size of the EBBs and the length of some of the paths through the
EBBs. For trace scheduling, it avoids the complications caused by interim
entry points in the trace. In either case, cloning also eliminates some of the
branches and jumps in the EBBs.

For the example CFG shown in the margin, cloning would produce the CFG
labeled “Example After Cloning.” Block B5 has been cloned to create sepa-
rate instances for the path from B1 and the path from B4. Similarly, B3 has
been cloned twice to create a unique instance for each path that enters it.
Taken together, these actions eliminate all join points in the CFG.

At this point, the compiler can combine some of the blocks, to produce the
final CFG, “Example After Combining Blocks.” This step eliminates some
control-flow operations, such as the jump from B4 to B′5.

Now, the entire graph forms one single EBB. The compiler can select the
hottest path, say ⟨B0, B1, B2 & 3⟩ and schedule it. It can then use ⟨B0, B1⟩
as a prefix to schedule B5 & 3. Finally, it can use B0 as a prefix to sched-
ule B4 & 5 & 3. Cloning the CFG eliminates most of the interference between
these distinct paths.

Contrast this result with the result of superlocal scheduling on the original
CFG. The superlocal algorithm scheduled B4 with respect to B0, as happens
with the cloned graph. However, the superlocal algorithm scheduled both
B3 and B5 with no prior context. In the cloned graph, each is duplicated
and scheduled to a set of specific prefixes. The price of this specialization is
increased code size.

Tail-recursive programs can also benefit from cloning. Recall from Sec-
tions 7.5.2 and 10.4.1 that a program is tail recursive if its last action is a



tail call—a recursive self-invocation. When the compiler detects a tail call,
it can convert the call into a jump back to the procedure’s entry. As shown in
the margin, cloning blocks in the tail-recursive procedure may create a code
shape that gives the scheduler a longer block and a more restricted context
with which to work.

The first diagram shown in the margin shows the abstracted CFG graph for
a tail-recursive routine, after the tail call has been optimized. Block B0 is
entered along two paths, the path from the procedure entry and the path
from B1. The scheduler must use worst-case assumptions about what pre-
cedes B0. By cloning B0 as shown in the lower drawing, the compiler can
make control enter B′0 along only one edge, which may improve the re-
sults of regional scheduling. To further simplify the situation, the compiler
might coalesce B′0 onto the end of B1, creating a single-block loop body.
The resulting loop can be scheduled with either a local scheduler or a loop
scheduler, as appropriate.

SECTION REVIEW
Regional scheduling techniques build longer segments of straight-line code
to which they apply list scheduling. The infrastructure of regional scheduling
simply provides more context and more operations to the list scheduler, in
an attempt to provide that scheduler with more freedom and more
opportunities. The quality of the code that the regional scheduler produces
is, to some extent, determined by the quality of the underlying scheduler.

Superlocal scheduling, trace scheduling, and superblock cloning before
superlocal scheduling can each introduce compensation code. The
compensation code takes additional space. It may introduce additional
operations along some of the paths. However, experience has shown that
the benefits of regional scheduling often outweight the costs.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In regional scheduling, cross-block code motion can necessitate the in-
sertion of compensation code. How can the compiler identify situations
in which moving an operation across a block boundary will not require
compensation code?

2.
Both trace scheduling and cloning try to improve on the results of su-
perlocal scheduling. Compare and contrast these approaches and their
expected results.



12.5 ADVANCED TOPICS

Compiler optimization has, since the first FORTRAN compiler, focused on
improving code in loops. The reason is simple: code inside loops executes
more frequently than code outside of loops. This observation has led to the
development of specialized scheduling techniques that attempt to decrease
the total running time of a loop. These loop-schedulers can create better
schedules than a regional scheduler for one simple reason: they account for
the flow of values across the entire loop, including the loop-closing branch.

Loop scheduling comes into play when the default scheduler cannot produce
compact and efficient code for a loop. If the scheduled loop has no unused
issue slots, loop scheduling is unlikely to help. If, on the other hand, it has a
significant number of empty issue slots, then loop scheduling may increase
functional unit utilization and decrease the loop’s overall running time.

Software pipelining schedules a loop by mimicking the behavior of a hard-
Initiation interval
A loop’s initiation interval is the lag, in
cycles, between the start of the ith iteration
and the start of the (i + 1)st iteration.

ware pipeline. It overlaps the executions of successive iterations of the loop
so that operations from two or more iterations execute concurrently. The
pipelined loop decreases the lag between the start of the ith and (i +1)st
iterations—the initiation interval of the loop. A smaller initiation interval
leads to faster overall execution for the entire loop.

12.5.1 The Strategy Behind Software Pipelining

The speed advantage of software pipelining is simple. For a nonpipelined
loop, the initiation interval is simply the number of cycles, c, that it takes
to execute one iteration of the loop. If a loop executes n iterations, the total
execution time of the loop is n · c.

After software pipelining, the loop starts the (i + 1)st iteration before the ith
iteration has finished. This strategy produces a smaller initiation interval, ii,
which reduces the overall execution time of the loop.

The pipelined loop starts a new iteration every ii cycles. The first n − 1 it-
erations each incur a cost of just ii cycles. The rest is overlapped with later
iterations. The final iteration incurs the full cost, c, because the final part of
the loop executes on its own. Thus, the total cost of the pipelined loop is
(n − 1) · ii + c cycles. We can guarantee, by construction, that ii ≤ c.

From a code shape perspective, the transformed loop consists of a pipelined
Loop kernel
The central portion of a software pipelined
loop, the kernel, executes most of the loop’s
iterations in an interleaved fashion.

kernel that performs the steady-state computation, along with a prolog and
an epilog to handle the initialization and finalization of the loop. The com-
bined effect is analogous to that of a hardware pipeline, which executes
multiple distinct operations concurrently.



Cycle
Functional Unit 0
Comments

–4
loadI
@x
⇒ r@x
Set up the loop

–3
loadI
@y
⇒ r@y
with initial loads

–2
loadI
@z
⇒ r@z
–1
addI
r@x, 796 ⇒ rub

1
L1: loadAO
rarp, r@x ⇒ rx
Get x[i] & y[i]

2
loadAO
rarp, r@y ⇒ ry
3
addI
r@x, 4
⇒ r@x
Bump the pointers

4
addI
r@y, 4
⇒ r@y
in shadow of loads

5
mult
rx, ry
⇒ rz
The actual work

6
cmp_LE
r@x,rub
⇒ rcc
Shadow of mult

7
storeAO rz
⇒ rarp, r@z
Save the result

8
addI
r@z, 4
⇒ r@z
Bump z’s pointer

9
cbr
rcc
→ L1, L2
Loop-closing branch

L2: ...

■ FIGURE 12.11 Example Loop, Local Scheduler, One Functional Unit.

When the pipelined loop executes, the prolog fills the pipeline. If the ker-
nel executes operations from three iterations of the original loop, then each
kernel iteration processes roughly one-third of each active iteration of the
original loop. To start execution, the prolog must perform enough work to
prepare for the last third of iteration 1, the second third of iteration 2, and
the first third of iteration 3.

After the loop kernel completes, the epilog completes the final iterations,
which empty the pipeline. In the hypothetical example, the epilog must ex-
ecute the last third of the second-to-last iteration and the last two-thirds of
the final one. The prolog and epilog increase the loop’s overall code size.

To make this discussion concrete, consider the following loop in C:

for (i=0; i < 200; i++)
z[i] = x[i] * y[i];

Assume that x, y, and z all have lower bounds of zero. Fig. 12.11 shows the
ILOC code that a compiler might generate for the loop, after optimization
and local scheduling. Both operator strength reduction and linear function
test replacement have been applied (see Section 10.7.2), so the address ex-
pressions for x, y, and z are updated with addI operations and the end of
loop test has been rewritten in terms of the offset in x, which eliminates the
need for i.



Cycle
Functional Unit 0
Functional Unit 1

–2
loadI
@x
⇒ r@x
loadI @y
⇒ r@y
–1
loadI
@z
⇒ r@z
addI
r@x, 796 ⇒ rub

1
L1: loadAO
rarp, r@x ⇒ rx
nop

2
loadAO
rarp, r@y ⇒ ry
addI
r@x, 4
⇒ r@x
3
addI
r@y, 4
⇒ r@y
mult
rx, ry
⇒ rz
4
cmp_LE
r@x, rub
⇒ rcc
nop

5
storeAO rz
⇒ rarp, r@z
addI
r@z, 4
⇒ r@z
6
stall on rz
cbr
rcc
→ L1, L2

7
... start of next iteration ...

■ FIGURE 12.12 Example Loop, Local Scheduler, Two Functional Units.

The code in Fig. 12.11 has been scheduled for a machine with one functional
Opcode
Latency

loadAO
3

storeAO
3

loadI
1

addI
1

mult
2

cmp_LE
1

cbr
1

Latencies Used in the Example

unit. Operation latencies are shown in the margin. The first column in the
figure shows the cycle in which each operation issues, normalized to the
start of the loop (at label L1).

The preloop code initializes a pointer for each array (r@x, r@y, and r@z). It
computes an upper bound for the range of r@x into rub; the end-of-loop test
uses rub. The loop body loads x and y, performs the multiply, and stores
the result into z. The schedule uses all of the issue slots in the shadow of
long-latency operations. During the load latencies, it updates r@x and r@y.
The comparison executes during the multiply. It fills the slots after the store
with the update of r@z and the branch. This produces a tight schedule for a
one-functional-unit machine.

Consider what happens to the same code on a two-functional unit, super-
scalar processor with the same latencies. Assume that loads and stores must
execute on unit 0, that functional units stall when an operation issues before
its operands are ready, and that the processor cannot issue operations to a
stalled unit. Fig. 12.12 shows the execution trace of the loop’s first iteration.
The mult in cycle 3 stalls because neither rx nor ry is ready. It stalls in cy-
cle 4 waiting for ry, begins executing again in cycle 5, and produces rz at the
end of cycle 6. The storeAO must stall until the start of cycle 7. Assuming
that the hardware can tell that r@z contains an address that is distinct from
r@x and r@y, the processor can issue the first loadAO for the second iteration
in cycle 7. If not, then the processor will stall until the store completes.

With two functional units, the code executes more quickly. The preloop is
down to two cycles, from four. The initiation interval is down to six cy-
cles, from nine. The critical path executes as quickly as we can expect; the



■ FIGURE 12.13 Example Loop, Software Pipelined, Two Functional Units.

multiply issues before ry is available and executes as soon as possible. The
store proceeds as soon as rz is available. Some issue slots are wasted (unit 0
in cycle 6 and unit 1 in cycles 1 and 4).

Reordering the linear code can change the execution schedule. For example,
moving the update of r@x in front of the load from r@y allows the processor
to issue the updates of r@x and r@y in the same cycles as the loads from those
registers. This lets some of the operations issue earlier in the schedule, but
it does nothing to speed up the critical path. The net result is the same—a
six-cycle loop.

Pipelining the code can further reduce the initiation interval, as shown in
Fig. 12.13. The top portion, above the dotted line, contains the loop’s pro-
log. The central portion contains its five-cycle kernel. The bottom portion,
below the second dotted line, contains the loop’s epilog. The next subsection
presents the algorithm that generated the kernel for this pipelined loop.

12.5.2 An Algorithm for Software Pipelining

To pipeline the loop, the scheduler first constructs an estimate of the mini-
mum initiation interval that the loop needs. Next, it tries to schedule the loop
into a kernel of that length; if that process fails, it increases the kernel size



by one and tries again. This process halts; in the worst case, the scheduler
reaches the initiation interval of the original, nonpipelined loop. Once the
scheduler has the kernel, it generates a prolog and epilog to match.

Estimating Kernel Size

To estimate kernel size, the loop scheduler can compute lower bounds on
the number of cycles that the kernel must contain.

■
The first lower bound arises from a simple observation: the schedule
must issue every operation in the loop body. The number of cycles re-
quired to issue all the operations is bounded by:

RC = maxu(⌈Ou/Nu⌉)

where u varies over all functional unit types, Ou is the number of oper-
ations of type u in the loop and Nu is the number of functional units of
type u. RC represents the resource constraint.

■
The second lower bound arises from another simple observation: the
Recurrence
a loop-based computation that creates a
cycle in the dependence graph

A recurrence must span multiple iterations.

initiation interval must be large enough to let each recurrence in the loop
complete. The scheduler can compute the lower bound from recurrence
lengths as follows:

DC = maxr(⌈dr/kr⌉)

where r ranges over all recurrences in the loop body, dr is the cumula-
tive delay around recurrence r, and kr is the number of iterations that r
spans. DC is the dependence constraint.

These two estimates, RC and DC, are lower bounds because the scheduler
may not find a schedule that fits within that number of cycles.

The scheduler can use ii = max(RC, DC) as its first estimate for the initi-
ation interval. It tries to schedule the loop into ii. If that attempt fails, it
increments ii and tries again. We know that it will succeed for some ii in the
range max(RC, DC) ≤ ii ≤ c, where c is the length of the schedule found by
the local scheduler.

To compute RC, the scheduler must account for two different estimates. The
loop has a total of nine operations that are scheduled on two functional units,
producing a value for RC of ⌈9/2⌉ = 5. It has three memory operations
that are restricted to unit zero; these operations produce a value for RC of
⌈3/1⌉ = 3. Thus, the RC constraint for the loop is max(5,3) = 5.

The computation of DC looks at the dependence graph. It contains three
recurrences, one for each of r@x, r@y, and r@z. All three have a cumulative
delay of one and span one iteration, so DC = ⌈1/1⌉ = 1.

With RC = 5 and DC = 1, ii = max(RC, DC) = 5.



■ FIGURE 12.14 Dependence Graph for the Example Loop.

Scheduling the Kernel

To schedule the kernel, the compiler uses the list scheduler with a fixed-
Modulo scheduling
List scheduling with a cyclic clock is some-
times called modulo scheduling.
length schedule of ii slots. Updates to the scheduling clock, Cycle in
Fig. 12.6, are performed modulo ii. The cycles in the dependence graph
introduce two complications for the scheduler to manage.

First, the scheduler must recognize that loop-carried dependences, such as
Loop-carried dependence
a dependence that represents a value carried
along the CFG edge for the loop-closing
branch

(g, e), (h, f), and (l, k), do not constrain the first iteration of the loop. The
first iteration will use values from before the loop, as indicated by the edges
from a, b, and c in the dependence graph from Fig. 12.14(b).

Second, the loop-carried dependences expose critical antidependences. In
the example, g both reads and writes r@x. For any given value in r@x, g can-
not update r@x before e uses the value in r@x. Thus, g cannot be scheduled
before e. (They can issue in the same cycle, because e reads its arguments
at the start of the cycle and g writes its result at the end of the cycle.) By
similar logic, h cannot precede f and l cannot precede k.

Fig. 12.15 shows the steps that the scheduler takes with the example code. It
assumes a two functional-unit processor with memory operations restricted
to unit zero, and an initiation interval of five.

Cycle 1
The ready list starts with (e, f). Antidependences exclude g, h,
and l. The scheduler chooses e and places e on unit 0. That placement



Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

3
j
—

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

3
j
—

4
—
—

Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

3
j
—

4
—
—

5
m
i

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

3
j
—

4
—
—

5
m
i

Cycle
F0
F1

1
e
g

2
f
h

3
j
—

4
k
l

5
m
i

Cycle 5
Cycles 1, 2, and 3
Cycle 4

■ FIGURE 12.15 Steps in Modulo Scheduling the Example.

satisfies the antidependence on g, so it moves g onto the ready list. g has
a longer distance to a root than f, so the scheduler places g on unit 1, as
shown in the first panel.

Cycle 2
Both f and j are ready. Using distance to a root, the scheduler
places f on unit 0, which adds h to the ready list. The scheduler picks h
based on distance to a root, and places h on unit 1.

Cycle 3
Only j is ready. The scheduler places it on unit 0.

Cycle 4
At this point, m is ready. However, the scheduler is constrained to
place the branch so that control transfers after cycle 5. Thus, the scheduler
leaves cycle 4 empty.

Cycle 5
Both m and i are ready. The scheduler places them in cycle 5.

Cycle 1
When the cycle advances, it wraps to 1. The ready list is empty,
so nothing can be scheduled. k is still on the active list, so the scheduler
bumps the counter and continues.

Cycle 2
Operation k is ready. Because it is a store, it must execute on
unit 0. Unit 0 is busy in cycle 2, so the scheduler bumps the counter.

Cycle 3
Unit 0 is still busy, so the scheduler bumps the counter.

Cycle 4
In cycle 4, unit 0 is free. The scheduler places k on unit 0 for
cycle 4. That placement satisfies the antidependence and makes l ready.
The scheduler places l on unit 1 in cycle 4.



Cycle
Functional Unit 0
Functional Unit 1

1
L1: loadAO
rarp, r@x ⇒ rx
addI r@x, 4 ⇒ r@x
2
loadAO
rarp, r@y ⇒ ry
addI r@y, 4 ⇒ r@y
3
cmp_LE
r@x, rub
⇒ rcc
nop

4
storeAO rz
⇒ rarp, r@z
addI r@z, 4 ⇒ r@z
5
cbr
rcc
→ L1, L2
mult rx, ry ⇒ rz

■ FIGURE 12.16 Final Kernel Schedule for the Pipelined Loop.

The scheduler repeatedly bumps the counter (modulo 5) until both the active
Changing the address computation can lead
to a shorter kernel, as shown in Exercise 9.

Similarly, use of an autoincrement on r@x,
r@y, and r@z would remove operations from
the loop and change the schedule.

list and the ready list are empty. Since neither operation k nor operation l has
any descendants in the dependence graph, both ready and active become
empty and the algorithm halts.

Modulo scheduling fails when it does not find an issue slot for some op-
eration. If that happens, the algorithm increments the initiation interval
and tries again. The process must halt; when ii reaches the original schedule
length, it will schedule in a single iteration.

Generating Prolog and Epilog Code

In principle, generating the prolog and epilog code is simple. The key in-
sight, in both cases, is that the compiler can use the dependence graph to
guide the process.

To generate the prolog code, the compiler starts from each upward exposed
use in the loop and follows the dependence graph in a backward scheduling
phase. For each upward exposed use, it must emit the chain of operations
that computes the necessary value, properly scheduled to cover their la-
tencies. To generate the epilog, the compiler starts from each downward
exposed use in the loop and follows the dependence graph in a forward
scheduling phase.

The kernel of our pipelined loop, shown in Fig. 12.16, has upward exposed
uses for r@x, r@y, r@z, rub, and rz. The original loop had the first four uses.
The exposed reference to rz arose because the scheduler moved the storeAO
operation from the kernel’s ith iteration to its (i + 1)st iteration.

Thus, the prolog still needs the operations that define r@x, r@y, r@z, and rub.
In addition, it must compute the first value of rz and bump the addresses in

r@x and r@y so that the first iteration of the kernel reads the second values of

x and y. These constraints produce the prolog shown in Fig. 12.13.



■ FIGURE 12.17 Software Pipelining in a VLIW DSP Compiler.

In this case, the epilog is simple. The kernel executes the entire final itera-
tion, except for the storeAO. Thus, the epilog contains that operation, placed
to ensure that the multiply completes before the store issues.

12.5.3 A Final Example

Compilers for high-performance DSP architectures have used software
c = 0;
for (i=0;i<n;i++) {
c = c + a[i] * b[i];
}

C Loop for Example

pipelining to take advantage of their wide instructions. As an example, con-
sider the simple loop shown in the margin. In 2002, a colleague at Texas In-
struments sent us the code that their compiler generated to execute this loop
on the TMS320C6x processors. Fig. 12.17(a) shows the final code, which has
been optimized so that it has a single instruction, 8 operation, kernel.

C6x processors can bundle up to eight operations in a cycle. The || sequence
at the start of a line indicates that the operation goes into the same instruc-
tion bundle as the operation on the previous line. The processor has two
register banks, the A and B banks. The codes that begin with a period, such



as .S1, dictate where in the VLIW instruction this operation fits. Finally,
the doubleword load (LDW) reads two numbers from memory; the multiply
low (MPY) and multiply high (MPYH) multiply the low-order and high-order
numbers, respectively.

The compiler pipelined the loop and fit it into a single VLIW instruction—
Several details are missing in the code
fragment. We assume that B0, A4, and B4 are
initialized earlier.
the operations between the dashed lines in panel (a). The branch has a five-
cycle latency; operations can execute in the delay slots of a branch. Thus,
the loop prolog code consists of five instructions, each containing a branch.
The last two instructions in the prolog also zero the various registers used in
the loop, to create the correct initial conditions.

From a software pipelining perspective, the compiler found the minimal ini-
tiation interval—it cannot do better than one cycle. The control flow, shown
in panel (b), is counter-intuitive. The prolog fills the pipeline with pending
branches, so that every iteration of the kernel executes in the delay slot of a
branch issued several cycles earlier. We would not expect a typical human
programmer to discover this code shape.

The example arose as part of a study on how to derive accurate representa-
tions, including CFGs, from optimized assembly code. Needless to say, the
CFG in Fig. 12.17(b) obfuscates the original loop structure. Algorithmically
deriving the CFG in panel (b) is complicated. Deriving the CFG for the orig-
inal loop from the optimized assembly code appears to be much harder. The
original CFG appears in the margin.

12.6 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

To obtain reasonable performance on a modern processor, the compiler
must perform instruction scheduling. Most compilers use some form of list
scheduling. The algorithm is easily adapted and parameterized by changing
priority schemes, tie-breaking rules, and even the direction of scheduling.
List scheduling is robust, in the sense that it produces good results across a
wide variety of codes. In practice, it often finds a time-optimal schedule.

Variations on list scheduling that work over larger regions address problems
that arise, at least in part, from increased processor complexity. Regional
and loop scheduling techniques are responses to the increase in both the
number of pipelines and their individual latencies. As machines have be-
come more complex, schedulers need more context to discover enough
instruction-level parallelism to keep the machines busy. Trace scheduling
was developed for VLIW architectures, which provide many functional
units. Software pipelining provides a way of increasing the number of oper-
ations issued per cycle and decreasing total time for executing a loop.



CHAPTER NOTES

Scheduling problems arise in many domains, ranging from construction,
through industrial production, through package delivery to spaceflight pay-
load planning. A rich literature has developed on scheduling, including
many specialized variants of the problem. Instruction scheduling has been
studied as a distinct problem since the 1960s.

Algorithms that guarantee optimal schedules exist for simple situations. For
example, on a machine with one functional unit and uniform operation la-
tencies, the Sethi-Ullman labelling algorithm creates an optimal schedule
for an expression tree [321]. It can be adapted to produce good code for
expression DAGs. Fischer and Proebsting built on the Sethi-Ullman algo-
rithm to derive an algorithm that produces optimal or near optimal results
for small memory latencies [299]. Unfortunately, it has trouble as latencies
rise or the number of functional units grows.

Much of the scheduling literature deals with variants on the list-scheduling
algorithm. Landskov et al. is often cited as the definitive work on list
scheduling [248], but the algorithm goes back, at least, to Heller in
1961 [198]. Other papers that build on list scheduling include Bernstein and
Rodeh [42], Gibbons and Muchnick [169], and Hennessy and Gross [199].
Krishnamurthy et al. provide a high-level survey of the literature for
pipelined processors [243,332]. Kerns, Lo, and Eggers developed balanced
scheduling as a way to adapt list scheduling to uncertain memory laten-
cies [232,257]. Schielke’s RBF algorithm explored the use of randomization
and repetition as an alternative to multilayered priority schemes [318]. Mot-
wani et al. used α-β tuning to blend two heuristics: one that decreases
register pressure and another that increases ILP [278].

Many authors have described regional scheduling algorithms. The first au-
tomated regional technique appears to be Fisher’s trace-scheduling algo-
rithm [158,159]. It has been used in several commercial systems [148,259]
and numerous research systems [330]. Hwu et al. proposed superblock
scheduling as an alternative [211]; inside a loop, it clones blocks to avoid
join points, as shown in Section 12.4.3.

Click proposed a global scheduling algorithm based on the use of a global
value graph [90]; it was used in the original HotSpot Server Compiler for

JAVA [288]. Bala and Rubin developed a technique that can efficiently per-
form aggressive scheduling techniques, such as cross-block code motion
and updates to previously scheduled blocks [33]. They applied the ideas in
a global scheduler for the Kendall Square Research compiler.


Exercises
659

Several authors have proposed techniques to make use of specific hard-
ware features [311,330]. Other approaches that use replication to im-
prove scheduling include Ebcio˘glu and Nakatani [147] and Gupta and
Soffa [183]. Sweany and Beaty proposed choosing paths based on dom-
inance information [339]; others have looked at various aspects of that
approach [115,210,338].

Software pipelining has been explored extensively. Rau and Glaeser in-
troduced the idea in 1981 [304]. Lam developed the scheme for software
pipelining presented here [245]; the paper includes a hierarchical scheme
for handling control flow inside a loop. Aiken and Nicolau developed a sim-
ilar approach, called perfect pipelining [11] at the same time as Lam’s work.

The example for backward versus forward scheduling in Fig. 12.8 was
brought to our attention by Philip Schielke [318]. He took it from the SPEC
95 benchmark program go. It captures, concisely, an effect that has caused
many compiler writers to include both forward and backward schedulers in
their compilers’ back ends.

EXERCISES

1.
Some operations, such as a register-to-register copy, can execute on
Section 12.3
almost any functional unit, albeit with a different opcode. Can the sched-
uler capitalize on these alternatives? Suggest modifications to the basic
list-scheduling framework that allow it to use “synonyms” for a basic
operation such as a copy.

2.
Most modern microprocessors have delay slots on some or all branch
operations. With a single delay slot, the operation immediately follow-
ing the branch executes while the branch processes; thus, the ideal slot
for scheduling a branch is in the second-to-last cycle of a basic block.
(Most processors have a version of the branch that does not execute the
delay slot, so that the compiler can avoid generating a nop instruction in
an unfilled delay slot.)

a.
How would you adapt the list-scheduling algorithm to improve its
ability to “fill” delay slots?

b.
Sketch a postscheduling pass that would fill delay slots.

c.
Propose a creative use for the branch-delay slots that cannot be
filled with useful operations.

3.
Maintenance of the Ready and Active lists is a major part of the list
scheduling algorithm (see Fig. 12.6). At each cycle, the scheduler must
determine which operations in Active have completed, and then check



■ FIGURE 12.18 CFG for Question 7.

each successor of a newly completed operation to see if its operands are
now ready.

a.
Checking, for each successor s, whether all of the operands that s
uses are yet available is an expensive part of list scheduling. Sug-
gest a scheme to reduce the asymptotic cost of those checks.

b.
To avoid scanning the entire Active list, the compiler writer could
implement Active with a separate list for each cycle. How many
lists would be needed? How would this scheme affect the cost of
scheduling?

c.
A clever implementation of the multiple list scheme from part (b)
could reuse the list. Sketch the code needed to recycle the lists.

4.
In superlocal scheduling, what data structures must the scheduler pre-
Section 12.4
serve at the end of a block with multiple successors? Suggest an efficient
way to preserve them.

5.
Consider the CFG fragment shown in the margin.

Assume that the scheduler has decided to move c from B1 into B0 be-
tween a and b. (If that motion is safe, then c does not change a value
used in b.) The scheduler must ensure that c also has no impact on e.

1.
If c redefines a value used in e, how might the scheduler use renam-
ing to avoid the impact on e? Which definitions and uses must be
renamed?

2.
If the value is used again in some block that follows B1, how
might the scheduler ensure that those uses receive the correct value?
Phrase your answer in terms of the LIVEOUT sets for B1 and B2.

6.
Working again with the CFG in the margin, assume that the scheduler
has decided to move a into block B2. Under what conditions can it avoid
inserting a copy of a into B1?


Exercises
661

Cycle
Functional Unit 0
Comments

–5
addI
rarp, @x ⇒ r@x
Set up the loop

–4
addI
rarp, @y ⇒ r@y
with initial loads

–3
addI
rarp, @z ⇒ r@z

–2
loadI
0
⇒ rctr

–1
loadI
792
⇒ rub

1
L1: loadAO
rctr, r@x ⇒ rx
Get x[i] & y[i]

2
loadAO
rctr, r@y ⇒ ry

3
mult
rx, ry
⇒ rz
Will stall on rx & ry

4
cmp_LE
rctr,rub ⇒ rcc
Shadow of mult

5
storeAO rz
⇒ rctr, r@z
Save the result

6
addI
rctr, 4
⇒ rctr
Bump the offset counter

7
cbr
rcc
→ L1, L2
Loop-closing branch

L2: ...

■ FIGURE 12.19 Code for Question 9.

7.
Using the CFG shown in Fig. 12.18.

a.
List the extended basic blocks in the CFG, along with each path
through each EBB. In what order should the compiler schedule
those paths?

b.
List the traces that the trace construction algorithm will find in the

CFG, in the order that they should be scheduled.

c.
Show the CFG that would result from applying superblock cloning
to the CFG in Fig. 12.18. Label nodes with their estimated execu-
tion counts.

8.
Software pipelining overlaps loop iterations to create an effect that re-
Section 12.5
sembles hardware pipelining.

a.
Discuss the impact that software pipelining will have on the de-
mand for registers in the pipelined loop (versus the original loop)?

b.
How can the scheduler use predicated execution to reduce the code-
space penalty for software pipelining? (Predicated execution is dis-
cussed in Section 7.4.2 on page 352.)

9.
The example code in Fig. 12.11 generates a five-cycle software
pipelined kernel because it contains nine operations. If the compiler



generated addresses for x, y, and z in a different way, as shown in
Fig. 12.19, it could further reduce the operation count in the loop body.

This scheme uses one more register than the original code.

a.
Compute RC and DC for this version of the loop.

b.
Generate the software pipelined loop body.

c.
Generate the prolog and epilog code for your pipelined loop body.




