Chapter13

Register Allocation

ABSTRACT
The code generated by a compiler must make effective use of the limited re-
sources of the target processor. Among the most constrained resources is the
set of hardware registers. Register use plays a major role in determining the
performance of compiled code. At the same time, register allocation—the
process of deciding which values to keep in registers—is a combinatorially
hard problem.

Most compilers decouple decisions about register allocation from other opti-
mization decisions. Thus, most compilers include a separate pass for register
allocation. This chapter begins with local register allocation, as a way to in-
troduce the problem and the terminology. The bulk of the chapter focuses on
global register allocation and assignment via graph coloring. The advanced
topics section discusses some of the many variations on that technique that
have been explored in research and employed in practice.

KEYWORDS
Register Allocation, Register Spilling, Copy Coalescing, Graph-Coloring
Allocators

13.1 INTRODUCTION

Registers are a prominent feature of most processor architectures. Because
the processor can access registers faster than it can access memory, register
use plays an important role in the runtime performance of compiled code.
Register allocation is sufficiently complex that most compilers implement it
as a separate pass, either before or after instruction scheduling.

The register allocator determines, at each point in the code, which values
will reside in registers and which will reside in memory. Once that decision
is made, the allocator must rewrite the code to enforce it, which typically
adds load and store operations to move values between memory and specific
registers. The allocator might relegate a value to memory because the code
contains more live values than the target machine’s register set can hold.
Alternatively, the allocator might keep a value in memory between uses
because it cannot prove that the value can safely reside in a register.



Conceptual Roadmap

A compiler’s register allocator takes as input a program that uses some
arbitrary number of registers. The allocator transforms the code into an
equivalent program that fits into the finite register set of the target machine.
It decides, at each point in the code, which values will reside in registers and
which will reside in memory. In general, accessing data in registers is faster
than accessing it in memory.

To transform the code so that it fits into the target machine’s register set,
Spill
When the allocator moves a value from a
register to memory, it is said to spill the
value.

Restore
When the allocator retrieves a previously
spilled value, it is said to restore the value.

the allocator inserts load and store operations that move values, as needed,
between registers and memory. These added operations, or “spill code,”
include loads, stores, and address computations. The allocator tries to mini-
mize the runtime costs of these spills and restores.

As a final complication, register allocation is combinatorially hard. The
problems that underlie allocation and assignment are, in their most general
forms, NP-complete. Thus, the allocator cannot guarantee optimal solutions
in any reasonable amount of time. A good register allocator runs quickly—
somewhere between O(n) and O(n2) time, where n is the size of the input
program. Thus, a good register allocator computes an effective approximate
solution to a hard problem, and does it quickly.

A Few Words About Time

The register allocator runs at compile time to rewrite the almost-translated
program from the IR program’s name space into the actual registers and
memory of the target ISA. Register allocation may be followed by a schedul-
ing pass or a final optimization, such as a peephole optimization pass.

The allocator produces code that executes at runtime. Thus, when the allo-
cator reasons about the cost of various decisions, it makes a compile-time
estimate of the expected change in running time of the final code. These
estimates are, of necessity, approximations.

A few compiler systems have included description-driven, retargetable reg-
ister allocators. To reconfigure these systems, the compiler writer builds a
description of the target machine at design time; build-time tools then con-
struct a working allocator.

Overview

To simplify the earlier phases of translation, many compilers use an IR in
which the name space is not tied to either the address space of the target pro-
cessor or its register set. To translate the IR code into assembly code for the
target machine, these names must be mapped onto the hardware resources



of the target machine. Values stored in memory in the IR program must be
Virtual register
a symbolic register name that the compiler
uses, before register allocation

We write virtual registers as VRi, for i ≥ 0.

Physical register
an actual register on the target processor

We write physical registers as PRi, for
i ≥ 0.

turned into runtime addresses, using techniques such as those described in
Section 7.3. Values kept in virtual registers (VRs) must be mapped into the
processor’s physical registers (PRs).

The underlying memory model of the IR program determines, to a large
extent, the register allocator’s role (see Section 4.7.1).

■
With a register-to-register memory model, the IR uses as many VRs as
needed without regard for the size of the PR set. The register allocator
must then map the set of VRs onto the set of PRs and insert code to move
values between PRs and memory as needed.

■
With a memory-to-memory model, the IR keeps all program values in
memory, except in the immediate neighborhood of an operation that de-
fines or uses the value. The register allocator can promote a value from
memory to a register for a portion of its lifetime to improve perfor-
mance.

Thus, in a register-to-register model, the input code may not be in a form
where it could actually execute on the target computer. The register allocator
rewrites that code into a name space and a form where it can execute on the
target machine. In the process, the allocator tries to minimize the cost of
the new code that it inserts. By contrast, in a memory-to-memory model,
all of the data motion between registers and memory is explicit; the code
could execute on the target machine. In this situation, allocation becomes
an optimization that tries to keep some values in registers longer than the
input code did.

This chapter focuses on global register allocation in a compiler with a
Graph coloring
an assignment of colors to the nodes of a
graph so that two nodes, n1 and n2, have
different colors if the graph contains the
edge (n1, n2).

register-to-register memory model. Section 13.3 examines the issues that
arise in a single-block allocator; that local allocator, in turn, helps to mo-
tivate the need for global allocation. Section 13.4 explores global register
allocation via graph coloring. Finally, Section 13.5 explores variations on
the global coloring scheme that have been discussed in the literature and
tried in practical compilers.

13.2 BACKGROUND

The design and implementation of a register allocator is a complex task. The
decisions made in allocator design may depend on decisions made earlier
in the compiler. At the same time, design decisions for the allocator may
dictate decisions in earlier passes of the compiler. This section introduces
some of the issues that arise in allocator design.



13.2.1 A Name Space for Allocation: Live Ranges

At its heart, the register allocator creates a new name space for the code.
It receives code written in terms of VRs and memory locations; it rewrites
the code in a way that maps those VRs onto both the physical registers and
some additional memory locations.

To improve the efficiency of the generated code, the allocator should min-
imize unneeded data movement, both between registers and memory, and
among registers. If the allocator decides to keep some value x in a physical
register, it should arrange, if possible, for each definition of x to target the
same PR and for each use of x to read that PR. This goal, if achieved, elim-
inates unneeded register-to-register copy operations; it may also eliminate
some stores and loads.

Most register allocators construct a new name space: a name space of live
Live range
a closed set of related definitions and uses

Most allocators use live ranges as values
that they consider for placement in a physi-
cal register or in memory.

ranges. Each live range (LR) corresponds to a single value, within the scope
that the allocator examines. The allocator analyzes the flow of values in the
code, constructs its set of LRs, and renames the code to use LR names. The
details of what constitutes an LR differ across the scope of allocation and
between different allocation algorithms.

In a single block, LRs are easy to visualize and understand. Each LR corre-
sponds to a single definition and extends from that definition to the value’s
last use. Fig. 13.1(a) shows an ILOC fragment that appeared in Chapter 1;
panel (b) shows the code renamed into its distinct live ranges. The live
ranges are shown as a graph in panel (c). The graph can be summarized
as a set of intervals; for example LR2 is [6,9] and LR8 is [3,6]. The drawing
in panel (c) assumes no overlap between execution of the operations.

We denote LR8 as starting in operation three because the operation reads its
arguments at the start of its execution and writes its result at the end of its
execution. Thus, LR8 is actually defined at the end of the second operation.
By convention, we mark a live range as starting with the first operation after
it has been defined. This treatment makes clear that the two instances of r1 in
addI r1, 10 ⇒ r1 are not the same live range, unless other context makes
them so.

An LR ends for one of two reasons. An operation may be the name’s last
use along the current path through the code. Alternatively, the code might
redefine the name before its next use, to start a new LR.

In a CFG with control flow, the situation is more complex, as shown in the
margin. Consider the variable x. Its three definitions form two separate and
distinct live ranges.



■ FIGURE 13.1 Live Ranges in a Basic Block.

1. The use in B4 refers to two definitions: the one in B1 and the one at the
bottom of B2. These three events create the first LR, denoted LR1. LR1
spans B1, B3, B4, and the last statement in B2.
2. The use of x in B2 refers only to the definition that precedes it in B2. This
pair creates a second LR, denoted LR2. LR1 and LR2 are independent
of each other.

With more complex control flow, live ranges can take on more complicated
shapes. In the global allocator from Section 13.4, an LR consists of all the
definitions that reach some use, plus all of the uses that those definitions
reach. This collection of definitions and uses forms a closed set. The in-
terval notation, which works well in a single block, does not capture the
complexity of this situation.

Variations on Live Ranges

Different allocation algorithms have defined live range in distinct ways. The
The live ranges are as long as possible,
given the accuracy of the underlying
analysis. More precise information about
ambiguity might lengthen some live ranges.

local allocator described in Section 13.3 treats the entire lifetime of a value
in the basic block as a single live range; it uses a maximal-length live range
within the block. The global allocator described in Section 13.4 similarly
uses a maximal-length live range within the entire procedure.

Other allocators use different notions of a live range. The linear scan allo-
cators use an approximation of live ranges that overestimates their length
but produces an interval representation that leads to a faster allocator. The

SSA-based allocators treat each SSA name as a separate live range; they
must then translate out of SSA form after allocation. Several allocators have
restricted the length of live ranges to conform to features in the control-flow



graph, such as loops, to help control spill code placement. Section 13.5.3
describes some of these other formulations.

Code Shape and Live Ranges

The register allocator must understand when a source-code variable can
For the purposes of this discussion, a vari-
able is scalar if it is a single value that can
fit into a register.
legally reside in a register. If the variable is ambiguous, it can only reside in
a register between its creation and the next store operation in the code (see
Section 4.7.2). If it is unambiguous and scalar, then the allocator can choose
to keep it in a register over a longer period of time.

The compiler has two major ways to determine when a value is unambigu-
ous. It can perform static analysis to determine which values are safe to
keep in a register; such analysis can range from inexpensive and imprecise
through costly and precise. Alternatively, it can encode knowledge of ambi-
guity into the shape of the code.

If the compiler uses a register-to-register memory model, it can allocate
a VR to each unambiguous value. If the VR is live after the return from
the procedure that defines it, as with a static value or a call-by-reference
parameter, it will also need a memory home. The compiler can save the VR
at the necessary points in the code.

If the IR uses a memory-to-memory model, the allocator will still benefit
from knowledge about ambiguity. The compiler should record that informa-
tion with the symbol table entry for each value.

13.2.2 Interference

The register allocator’s most basic function is to determine, for two live
Interference
Two live ranges LR1 and LR2 interfere if
there exists an operation where both are
live, and the compiler cannot prove that
they have the same value.

ranges, whether or not they can occupy the same register. Two LRs can
share a register if they use the same class of register and they are not si-
multaneously live. If two LRs use the same class of register, but there exists
an operation where both LRs are live, then those LRs cannot use the same
register, unless the compiler can prove that they have the same value. We
say that such live ranges interfere.

Two LRs that use physically distinct classes of registers cannot interfere
because they do not compete for the same resource. Thus, for example,
a floating-point LR cannot interfere with an integer LR on a processor that
uses distinct registers for these two kinds of values.

In the example CFG in the margin, the two LRs for x do not interfere; x2 is
only live inside B2, in a stretch of code where x1 is dead. Thus, the allocation
decisions for x1 and x2 are independent. They could share a PR, but there is
no inherent reason for the allocator to make that choice.



Global allocators operate by finding interferences and using them to guide
the allocation process. The allocator described in Section 13.4 builds a con-
Interference graph
a graph G = (N,E) that has a node n for
each LR and an edge (LRi,LRj) if and only
if LRi and LRj interfere

crete representation of these conflicts, an interference graph, and constructs
a coloring of the graph to map live ranges onto PRs. Many global alloca-
tors follow this paradigm; they vary in the graph’s precision and the specific
coloring algorithm used.

Finding Interferences

To discover interferences, the compiler first computes live information for
the code. Then, it visits each operation in the code and adds interferences.
If the operation defines LRi, the allocator adds an interference to every LRj
that is live at that operation.

The one exception to this rule is a copy operation, LRi ← LRj which sets
the value of LRi to the value of LRj. Because the source and destination

LRs have the same value, the copy operation does not create an interference
between them. If LRi and LRj do not otherwise interfere, they could occupy
the same PR.

Interference and Register Pressure

The interference graph provides a quick way to estimate the demand for reg-
Register pressure
a term often used to refer to the demand for
registers
isters, often called register pressure. For a node LRi in the graph, the degree
of LRi, written LR◦
i , is the number of neighbors that LRi has in the graph. If
all of LRi’s neighbors are live at the same operation, then LR◦
i + 1 registers
would be needed to keep all of these values in registers. If those values are
not all live at the same operation, then the register pressure may be lower
than the degree. Maximum degree across all the nodes in the interference
graph provides a quick upper bound on the number of registers required to
execute the program without any spilling.

Representing Physical Registers

Often, the allocator will include nodes in the interference graph to represent

PRs. These nodes allow the compiler to specify both connections to PRs and
interferences with PRs. For example, if the code passes LRi as the second
parameter at a call site, the compiler could record that fact with a copy from

LRi to the PR that will hold the second parameter.

Some compilers use PRs to control assignment of an LR. To force LRi into
Pseudointerference
If the compiler adds an edge between LRi
and PRj, it must recognize that the edge
does not actually contribute to demand for
registers.

PRj, the compiler can add a pseudointerference from LRi to every PR ex-
cept PRj. Similarly, to prevent LRi from using PRj, the compiler can add
an interference between LRi and PRj. While this mechanism works, it can
become cumbersome. The mechanism for handling overlapping register



classes presented in Section 13.4.7 provides a more general and elegant way
to control placement in a specific PR.

13.2.3 Spill Code

When the allocator decides that it cannot keep some LR in a register, it must
spill that LR to memory before reallocating its PR to another value. It must
also restore the spilled LR into a PR before any subsequent use. These added
spills and restores increase execution time, so the allocator should insert as
few of them as practical. The most direct measure of allocation quality is
the time spent in spill code at runtime.

Allocators differ in the granularity with which they spill values. The global
allocator described in Section 13.4 spills the entire live range. When it de-
cides to spill LRi, it inserts a spill after each definition in LRi and a restore
immediately before each use of LRi. In effect, it breaks LRi into a set of tiny
LRs, one at each definition and each use.

By contrast, the local allocator described in Section 13.3 spills a live range
only between the point where its PR is reallocated and its next use. Because
it operates in a single block, with straight-line control flow, it can easily
implement this policy; the LR has a unique next use and the point of spill
always precedes that use.

Between these two policies, “spill everywhere” and “spill once,” lie many
possible alternatives. Researchers have experimented with spilling partial
live ranges. The problem of selecting an optimal granularity for spilling is,
undoubtedly, as hard as finding an optimal allocation; the correct granular-
ity likely differs between live ranges. Section 13.5 describes some of the
schemes that compiler writers and researchers have tried.

Nonuniform Spill Costs

To further complicate spilling, the allocator should account for the fact that
An LR might be clean due to a prior spill
along the current path, or because its value
also exists in memory.
properties of an LR can change the cost to spill it and to restore it.

Dirty Value
In the general case, the LR contains a value that has been
computed and has not yet been stored to memory; we say that the LR is
dirty. A dirty LR requires a store at its spill points and a load at its restore
points.

Clean Value
If the LR’s value already exists in memory, then a spill does
not require a store; we say that the LR is clean. A clean LR costs nothing
to spill; its restores cost the same as those of a dirty value.

Rematerializable Value
Some LRs contain values that cost less to re-
compute than to spill and restore. If the values used to compute the LR’s



value are available at each use of the LR, the allocator can simply recom-
pute the LR’s value on demand. A classic example is an LR defined by an
immediate load. Such an LR costs nothing to spill; to restore it, the com-
piler inserts the recomputation. Typically, an immediate load is cheaper
than a load from memory.

The allocator should, to the extent possible, account for the nonuniform
nature of spill costs. Of course, doing so complicates the allocator. Further-
more, the NP-complete nature of allocation suggests that no simple heuristic
will make the best choice in every situation.

Spill Locations

When the allocator spills a dirty value, it must place the value somewhere
Spill location
a memory address associated with an LR
that holds its value when the LR has no PR
in memory. If the LR corresponds precisely to a variable kept in memory,
the allocator could spill the value back to that location. Otherwise, it must
reserve a location in memory to hold the value during the time when the
value is live and not in a PR.

Most allocators place spill locations at the end of the procedure’s local data
Note that any value in a spill location is
unambiguous, an important point for postal-
location scheduling.
area. This strategy allows the spill and restore code to access the value at a
fixed offset from the ARP, using an address-immediate memory operation
if the ISA provides one. The allocator simply increases the size of the local
data area, at compile time, so the allocation incurs no direct runtime cost.

Because an LR is only of interest during that portion of the code where it is
live, the allocator has the opportunity to reduce the amount of spill memory
that it uses. If LRi and LRj do not interfere, they can share the same spill
location. Thus, the allocator can also use the interference graph to color spill
locations and reduce memory use for spills.

13.2.4 Register Classes

Many processors support multiple classes of registers. For example, most
Register class
a distinct group of named registers that
share common properties, such as length
and supported operations

ISAs have a set of general purpose registers (GPRs) for use in integer oper-
ations and address manipulation, and another set of floating-point registers
(FPRs). In the case of GPRs and FPRs, the two register classes are, almost
always, implemented with physically and logically disjoint register sets.

Often, an ISA will overlay multiple register classes onto a single physical
register set. As shown in Fig. 13.2(a), the ARM A-64 supports four sizes
of floating-point values in one set of quad-precision (128 bit) FPRs. The
128-bit FPRs are named Q0, Q1, ..., Q31. Each Qi is overlaid with a 64-bit
register Di, a 32-bit register Si, and a 16-bit register Hi. The shorter registers
occupy the low-order bits of the longer registers.



127
63
0

Q0
D0
S0
H0

···

Q31
D31
S31
H31

Floating-Point Registers

63
0

X0
W0

···

X31
W31

General Purpose Registers

(a) ARM-A64 Register Names

31
15
7
0

EAX
AH
AL

ECX
CH
CL

EDX
DH
DL

EBX
BH
BL

EBP
BP

ESP
SP

ESI
SI

EDI
DI

(b) Intel IA-32 Register Names

■ FIGURE 13.2 Overlapping Register Names.

The ARM A-64 GPRs follow a similar scheme. The 64-bit GPRs have both
64-bit names Xi and 32-bit names Wi. Again, the 32-bit field occupies the
low order bits of the 64-bit register.

The Intel IA-32 has a small register set, part of which is depicted in
The discussion focuses on a subset of the
IA-32 register set. It ignores segment reg-
isters and most of the registers added in
IA-64.

Fig. 13.2(b). It provides eight 32-bit registers. The CISC instruction set uses
distinct registers for specific purposes, leading to unique names for each reg-
ister, as shown. For backward compatibility with earlier 16-bit processors,
the PR set supports naming subfields of the 32-bit registers.

■
In four of the registers, the programmer can name the 32-bit register,
its lower 16 bits, and two 8-bit fields. These registers are the accumu-
lator (EAX), the count register (ECX), the data register (EDX), and the base
register (EBX).

■
In the other four registers, the programmer can name both the 32-bit
register and its lower 16 bits. These registers are the base of stack (EBP),
the stack pointer (ESP), the string source index pointer (ESI), and the
string destination index pointer (EDI).

The figure omits the instruction pointer (EIP and IP) and flag register (EFLAGS
and FLAGS), which have both 32-bit and 16-names. The later IA-64 features
a larger set of 32-bit GPRs, but preserves the IA-32 names and features in
the low numbered registers.

Many earlier ISAs used pairing schemes in the FPR set. The drawing in the

F0
F1
F2
F3

D0
D2

D3
D1
D3

Register Pairs

D3 is shown as wrapping around
the end of the register set.

margin shows how a four register set might work. It would consist of the
four 32-bit PRs, F0, F1, F2, and F3. 64-bit values occupy a pair of adjacent
registers. If a register pair can begin with any register, then four pairs are
possible: D0, D1, D2, and D3.



Some ISAs restrict a register-pair to begin with an odd-numbered register—
an aligned pair. With aligned pairs, only the registers shown as D0 and D2
would be available. With aligned pairs, use of D0 precludes the use of F0 and
F1. With unaligned pairs, use of D0 still precludes the use of F0 and F1. It
also precludes the use of D1 and D3.

In general, the register allocator should make effective use of all available
registers. Thus, it must understand the processor’s register classes and in-
clude mechanisms to use them in a fair and efficient manner. For physically
disjoint classes, such as floating-point and general purpose register classes,
the allocator can simply allocate them independently. If floating-point spills
use GPRs for address calculations, the compiler should allocate the FPRs
first.

The design of the register-set name space affects the difficulty of manag-
ing register classes in the allocator. For example, the ARM A-64 naming
scheme allows the allocator to treat all of the fields in a single PR as a single
resource; it can use one of X0 or W0. By contrast, the IA-32 allows concurrent
use of both AH and AL. Thus, the allocator needs more complex mechanisms
to handle the IA-32 register set. Section 13.4.7 explores how to build such
mechanisms into a global graph-coloring register allocator.

SECTION REVIEW
The register allocator must decide, at each point in the code, which values
should be kept in registers. To do so, it computes a name space for the
values in the code, often called live ranges. The allocator must discover
which live ranges cannot share a register—that is, which live ranges
interfere with each other. Finally, it must assign some live ranges to registers
and relegate some to memory. It must insert appropriate loads and stores
to move values between registers and memory to enforce its decisions.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Consider a block of straight-line code where the largest register pres-
sure at an operation in the block is j. Assume that the allocator is al-
lowed to use k registers. If j = k, can the allocator map the live ranges
onto the PRs without spilling?

2.
Consider a procedure represented as n ILOC operations. Can you bound
the number of nodes and edges in the interference graph?



13.3 LOCAL REGISTER ALLOCATION

The simplest formulation of the register allocation problem is local alloca-
Recall that a basic block is a maximal
length sequence of straight-line code.
tion: consider a single basic block and a single class of k PRs. This problem
captures many of the complexities of allocation and serves as a useful intro-
duction to the concepts and terminology needed to discuss global allocation.
To simplify the discussion, we will assume that one block constitutes the en-
tire program.

The input block contains a series of three-address operations, each of which
The input code uses source registers,
written in code as sri.

The output code uses physical registers,
written in code as either pri or simply ri.

The physical registers correspond, in gen-
eral, to named registers in the target ISA.

has the form opi sri, srj ⇒ srm. From a high-level view, the local register
allocator rewrites the block to replace each reference to a source register
(SR) with a reference to a specific physical register (PR). The allocator must
preserve the input block’s original meaning while it fits the computation into
the k PRs provided by the target machine.

If, at any point in the block, the computation has more than k live values—
that is, values that may be used in the future—then some of those values will
need to reside in memory for some portion of their lifetimes. (k registers can
hold at most k values.) Thus, the allocator must insert code into the block
to move values between memory and registers as needed to ensure that all
values are in PRs when needed and that no point in the code needs more
than k PRs.

This section presents a version of Best’s algorithm, which dates back to the
original FORTRAN compiler. It is one of the strongest known local alloca-
tion algorithms. It makes two passes over the code. The first pass derives
detailed knowledge about the definitions and uses of values; essentially, it
computes LIVE information within the block. The second pass then performs
the actual allocation.

Best’s algorithm has one guiding principle: when the allocator needs a PR
Spill
When the allocator moves a live value from
a PR to memory, it spills the value.

Restore
When the allocator retrieves a previously
spilled value from memory, it restores the
value.

and they are all occupied, it should spill the PR that contains the value whose
next use is farthest in the future. The intuition is clear; the algorithm chooses
the PR that will reduce demand for PRs over the longest interval. If all values
have the same cost to spill and restore, this choice is optimal. In practice,
that assumption is rarely true, but Best’s algorithm still does quite well.

To explain the algorithm it helps to have a concrete data structure. Assume
a three-address, ILOC-like code, represented as a list of operations. Each
operation, such as mult sr1, sr2 ⇒ sr3 is represented with a structure:

OPERAND 1
OPERAND 2
OPERAND 3

Opcode
SR
VR
PR
NU
SR
VR
PR
NU
SR
VR
PR
NU

mult
r1
-
-
∞
r2
-
-
∞
r3
-
-
∞



■ FIGURE 13.3 Representing a List of Operations.

The operation has an opcode, two inputs (operands 1 and 2), and a result
(operand 3). Each operand has a source-register name (SR), a virtual-register
name (VR), a physical-register name (PR), and the index of its next use (NU).

Register allocation is, at its core, the process of constructing a new name
space and modifying the code to use that space. Keeping the SR, VR, and
PR names separate simplifies both writing and debugging the allocator.

A list of operations might be represented as a doubly linked list, as shown
in Fig. 13.3. The local allocator will need to traverse the list in both direc-
tions. The list could be created in an array of structure elements, or with
individually allocated or block-allocated structures.

The first operation, a loadI, has an immediate value as its first argument,
Since the meaning is clear, we store a
loadI’s constant in its first operand’s SR
field.
stored in the SR field. It has no second argument. The next operation, a load,
also has just one argument. The final operation, a mult, has two arguments.
Because the code fragment does not contain a next use for any of the regis-
ters mentioned in the mult operation, their NU fields are set to ∞.

13.3.1 Renaming in the Local Allocator

To simplify the local allocator’s implementation, the compiler can first re-
name SRs so that they correspond to live ranges. In a single block, an LR
consists of a single definition and one or more uses. The span of the LR is
the interval in the block between its definition and its last use.

The renaming algorithm finds the live range of each value in a block. It
assigns each LR a new name, its VR name. Finally, it rewrites the code in
terms of VRs. Renaming creates a one-to-one correspondence between LRs
and VRs which, in turn, simplifies many of the data structures in the local
allocator. The allocator then reasons about VRs, rather than arbitrary SR
names.



VRName ← 0

for i ← 0 to max source-register number do

SRToVR[i] ← invalid

PrevUse[i] ← ∞

index ← block length

for each Op in the block, bottom to top, do

for each operand, O, that OP defines do
// defs first

if SRToVR[O.SR] = invalid then
// def has no uses

SRToVR[O.SR] ← VRName++
// start a new VR anyway

O.VR ← SRToVR[O.SR]
// set VR and NU for O

O.NU ← PrevUse[O.SR]

PrevUse[O.SR] ← ∞

SRToVR[O.SR] ← invalid
// next use of SR starts new VR

for each operand, O, that OP uses do
// uses after defs

if SRToVR[O.SR] = invalid then
// start a new VR

SRToVR[O.SR] ← VRName++

O.VR ← SRToVR[O.SR]
// set VR and NU for O

O.NU ← PrevUse[O.SR]

for each operand, O, that OP uses do

PrevUse[O.SR] ← index
// save to set next NU

index ← index - 1

■ FIGURE 13.4 Renaming Source Registers into Live Ranges.

The compiler can discover live ranges and rename them into VRs in a single
backward pass over the block. As it does so, it can also collect and record
next use information for each definition and use in the block. The algorithm,
shown in Fig. 13.4, assumes the representation described in the previous
section.

The renaming algorithm builds two maps: SRToVR, which maps an SR name
to a VR name, and PrevUse, which maps an SR name into the ordinal number
of its most recent use. The algorithm begins by initializing each SRToVR entry
to invalid and each PrevUse entry to ∞.

The algorithm walks the block from the last operation to the first operation.
At each operation, it visits definitions first and then uses. At each operand,
it updates the maps and defines the VR and NU fields.

When the algorithm visits a use or def, it first checks whether or not the
If the SR for a definition has no VR, that
value is never used. The algorithm still
assigns a VR to the SR.
reference’s SR, O.SR, already has a VR. If not, it assigns the next available

VR name to the SR and records that fact in SRToVR[O.SR]. Next, it records the

VR name and next use information in the operand’s record. If the operand is



a use, it sets PrevUse[O.SR] to the current operation’s index. For a definition,
it sets PrevUse[O.SR] back to ∞.

The algorithm visits definitions before uses to ensure that the maps are up-
Note that all operands to a store are uses.
The store defines a memory location, not a
register.
dated correctly in cases where an SR name appears as both a definition and
a use. For example, in add r17, r18 ⇒ r18, the algorithm will rewrite the defi-
nition with SRToVR[r18 ]; update SRToVR[r18 ] with a new VR name for the use;
and then set PrevUse[r18 ] to ∞.

After renaming, each live range has a unique VR name. An SR name that is
After renaming, we use live range and
virtual register interchangeably.
defined in multiple places is rewritten as multiple distinct VRs. In addition,
each operand in the block has its NU field set to either the ordinal number of
the next operation in the block that uses its value, or ∞ if it has no next use.
The allocator uses this information when it chooses which VRs to spill.

Consider, again, the code from Fig. 13.1. Panel (a) shows the original code.
Panel (b) shows that code after renaming. Panel (c) shows the span of each
live range, as an interval graph. The allocator does not rename rarp because
it is a dedicated PR that holds the activation record pointer and, thus, not
under the allocator’s control.

The maximum demand for registers, MAXLIVE, occurs at the start of the
MAXLIVE
The maximum number of concurrently live
VRs in a block
first mult operation, marked in panel (c) by the dashed gray line. Six VRs are
live at that point. Both VR7 and VR8 are live at the start of the operation. The
operation is the last use of VR7 and VR8, as well as the definition of VR5.

13.3.2 Allocation and Assignment

The algorithm for the local allocator appears in Fig. 13.5. It performs allo-
cation and assignment in a single forward pass over the block. It starts with
an assumption that no values are in PRs. It iterates through the operations,
in order, and incrementally allocates a PR to each VR. At each operation,
the allocator performs three steps.

1. To ensure that a use has a PR, the allocator first looks for a PR in the VR-
ToPR map. If the entry for VR is invalid, the algorithm calls GetAPR to find
a PR. The allocator uses a simple marking scheme to avoid allocating the
same PR to conflicting uses in a single operation.
2. In the second step, the allocator determines if any of the uses are the last
If a single instruction contains multiple
operations, the allocator should process all
of the uses before any of the definitions.
use of the VR. If so, it can free the PR, which makes the PR available for
reassignment, either to a result of the current operation or to some VR in
a future operation.
3. In the third step, the allocator ensures that each VR defined by the opera-
tion has a PR allocated to hold its value. Again, the allocator uses GetAPR
to find a suitable register.



for vr ← 0 to max VR number do

VRToPR[vr] ← invalid

for pr ← 0 to max PR number do

PRToVR[pr] ← invalid

PRNU[pr] ← ∞

push(pr)
// pop() occurs in GetAPR()

// iterate over the block

for each OP in the block, in linear order, do

clear the mark in each PR
// reset marks

for each use, U, in OP do
// allocate uses

pr ← VRToPR[U.VR]

if (pr = invalid) then

U.PR ← GetAPR(U.VR,U.NU)

Restore(U.VR,U.PR)

else

U.PR ← pr

set the mark in U.PR

for each use, U, in OP do
// last use?

if (U.NU = ∞ and PRToVR[U.PR] ̸= invalid) then

FreeAPR(U.PR)

clear the mark in each PR
// reset marks

for each definition, D, in OP do
// allocate defs

D.PR ← GetAPR(D.VR, D.NU)

set the mark in D.PR

GetAPR(vr, nu)

if stack is nonempty then

x ← pop()

else

pick an unmarked x to spill

Spill(x)

VRToPR[vr] ← x

PRToVR[x] ← vr

PRNU[x] ← nu

return x

FreeAPR(pr)

VRToPR[PRToVR[pr]] ← invalid

PRtoVR[pr] ← invalid

PRNU[pr] ← ∞

push(pr)

■ FIGURE 13.5 The Local Allocator.

Each of these steps is straightforward, except for picking the value to spill.
Most of the complexity of local allocation falls in that task.

The Workings of GetAPR

As it processes an operation, the allocator will need to find a PR for any VR
v that does not currently have one. This act is the essential act of register
allocation. Two situations arise:

1. Some PR p is free: The allocator can assign p to v. The algorithm main-
tains a stack of free PRs for efficiency.
2. No PR is free:
The allocator must choose a VR to evict from its PR p,
save the value in p to its spill location, and assign p to hold v.

If the reference to v is a use, the allocator must then restore v’s value from
its memory location to p.



SPILL AND RESTORE CODE
At the point where the allocator inserts spill code, all of the physical registers
(PRs) are in use. The compiler writer must ensure that the allocator can still
spill a value.

Two scenarios are possible. Most likely, the target machine’s ISA supports an
address mode that allows the spill without need for an additional PR. For
example, if the ARP has a dedicated register, say rarp, and the ISA includes an
address-immediate store operation, like ILOC’s storeAI, then spill locations in
the local data area can be reached without an additional PR.

On a target machine that only supports a simple load and store, or an
implementation where spill locations cannot reside in the activation record,
the compiler would need to reserve a PR for the address computation,
reducing the pool of available PRs. Of course, the reserved register is only
needed if MAXLIVE > k. (If MAXLIVE ≤ k, then no spills are needed and
neither is the reserved register.)

Best’s heuristic states that the allocator should spill the PR whose current
VR has the farthest next use. The algorithm maintains PRNU to facilitate this
decision. It simply chooses the PR with the largest PRNU. If the allocator
finds two PRs with the same PRNU, it must choose one.

The implementation of PRNU is a tradeoff between the efficiency of updates
and the efficiency of searches. The algorithm updates PRNU at each register
reference. It searches PRNU at each spill. As shown, PRNU is a simple array;
if updates are much more frequent than spills, that makes sense. If spills are
frequent enough, a priority queue for PRNU may improve allocation time.

Tracking Physical and Virtual Registers

To track the relationship between VRs and PRs, the allocator maintains two
maps. VRToPR contains, for each VR, either the name of the PR to which it is
currently assigned, or the value invalid. PRToVR contains, for each PR, either
the name of the VR to which it is currently assigned, or the value invalid.

As it proceeds through the block, the allocator updates these two maps so
that the following invariant always holds:

if VRToPR[vr] ̸= invalid then PRToVR[ VRToPR[vr] ] = vr.

The code in GetAPR and FreeAPR maintains these maps to ensure that the
invariant holds true. In addition, these two routines maintain PRNU, which
maps a PR into the ordinal number of the operation where it is next used—
a proxy for distance to that next use.



spill
x2
restore x3
restore x2

restore x3
restore x1

spill
x2
restore x3
restore x2

restore x3
restore x1
restore x3
restore x1

Spill Dirty
Spill Clean
Spill Dirty
Spill Clean

(a) References x3 x1 x2
(b) References x3 x1 x3 x1 x2

■ FIGURE 13.6 Spills of Clean Versus Dirty Values.

Spills and Restores

Conceptually, the implementation of Spill and Restore from Fig. 13.5 can be
quite simple.

■
To spill a PR p, the allocator can use PRToVR to find the VR v that cur-
Spill locations typically are placed at the
end of the local data area in the activation
record.
rently lives in p. If v does not yet have a spill location, the allocator
assigns it one. Next, it emits an operation to store p into the spill loca-
tion. Finally, it updates the maps: VRToPR, PRToVR, and PRNU.

■
To restore a VR v into a PR p, the allocator simply generates a load from
v’s spill location into p. As the final step, it updates the maps: VRToPR,
PRToVR, and PRNU.

If all spills have the same cost and all restores have the same cost, then
Best’s algorithm generates an optimal allocation for a block.

Complications from Spill Costs

In real programs, spill and restore costs are not uniform. Real code contains
both clean and dirty values; the cost to spill a dirty value is greater than the
cost to spill a clean value. To see this, consider running the local allocator
on a block that contains references to three names, x1, x2, and x3, with just
two PRs (k = 2).

Assume that the register allocator is at a point where x1 and x2 are currently
in registers and x1 is clean and x2 is dirty. Fig. 13.6 shows how different spill
choices affect the code in two different scenarios.

Panel (a) considers the case when the reference string for the rest of the
Reference string
A reference string is just a list of references
to registers or addresses. In this context,
each reference is a use, not a definition.

block is x3 x1 x2. If the allocator consistently spills clean values before dirty
values, it introduces less spill code for this reference string.

Panel (b) considers the case when the reference string for the rest of the
block is x3 x1 x3 x1 x2. Here, if the allocator consistently spills clean values
before dirty values, it introduces more spill code.



The presence of both clean and dirty values fundamentally changes the lo-
cal allocation problem. Once the allocator faces two kinds of values with
different spill costs, the problem becomes NP-hard. The introduction of re-
materializable values, which makes restore costs nonuniform, makes the
problem even more complex. Thus, a fast deterministic allocator cannot
always make optimal spill decisions. However, these local allocators can
produce good allocations by choosing among LRs with different spill costs
with relatively simple heuristics.

In practice, the allocator may produce better allocations if it differentiates
Remember, however, that the problem is
NP-hard. No efficient, deterministic algo-
rithm will always produce optimal results.
between dirty, clean, and rematerializable values (see Section 13.2.3). If two

PRs have the same distance to their next uses and different spill costs, then
the allocator should spill the lower-cost PR.

The issue becomes more complex, however, in choosing between PRs with
different spill costs that have next-use distances that are close but not iden-
tical. For example, given a dirty value with next use of n and a rematerial-
izable value with next use of n − 1, the latter value will sometimes be the
better choice.

SECTION REVIEW
The limited context in local register allocation simplifies the problem
enough so that a fast, intuitive algorithm can produce high-quality
allocations. The local allocator described in this section operates on a simple
principle: when a PR is needed, spill the PR whose next use is farthest in the future.

In a block where all values had the same spill costs, the local allocator would
achieve optimal results. When the allocator must contend with both dirty
and clean values, the problem becomes combinatorially hard. A local
allocator can produce good results, but it cannot guarantee optimal results.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Modify the renaming algorithm, shown in Fig. 13.4, so that is also com-
putes MAXLIVE, the maximum number of simultaneously live values at
any instruction in the block.

2.
Rematerializing a known constant is an easy decision, because the spill
requires no code and the restore is a single load immediate operation.
Under what conditions could the allocator profitably rematerialize an
operation such as add ra, rb ⇒ rx?



13.4 GLOBAL ALLOCATION VIA COLORING

Most compilers use a global register allocator—one that considers the entire
procedure as context. The global allocator must account for more complex
control flow than does a local allocator. Live ranges have multiple defi-
nitions and uses; they form complex webs across the control-flow graph.
Different blocks execute different numbers of times, which complicates spill
cost estimation. While some of the intuitions from local allocation carry for-
ward, the algorithms for global allocation are much more involved.

A global allocator faces another complication: it must coordinate register
use across blocks. In the local algorithm, the mapping from an enregistered

LR to a PR is, essentially, arbitrary. By contrast, a global allocator must
Spilling an LR breaks it into small pieces
that can be kept in distinct PRs.
either keep an LR in the same register across all of the blocks where it is
live or insert code to move it between registers.

Most global allocation schemes build on a single paradigm. They represent
conflicts between register uses with an interference graph and then color
that graph to find an allocation. Within this model, the compiler writer faces
a number of choices. Live ranges may be shorter or longer. The graph may
be precise or approximate. When the allocator must spill, it can spill that LR
everywhere or it can spill the LR only in regions of high register pressure.

These choices create a variety of different specific algorithms. This section
focuses on one specific set of choices: maximal length live ranges, a precise
interference graph, and a spill-everywhere discipline. These choices define
the global coloring allocator. Section 13.5 explores variations and improve-
ments to the global coloring allocator.

Fig. 13.7 shows the structure of the global coloring allocator.

Find Live Ranges
The allocator finds live ranges and rewrites the code
with a unique name for each LR. The new name space ensures that dis-
tinct values are not constrained simply because they shared the same
name in the input code.

Build Graph
The allocator builds the interference graph. It creates a node
for each LR and adds edges from LRi to any LRj that is live at an oper-
ation that defines LRi, unless the operation is a copy. Building the graph
tends to dominate the cost of allocation.

Coalesce Copies
The allocator looks at each copy operation, LRi ⇒LRj.
If LRi and LRj do not interfere, it combines the LRs, removes the copy,
and updates the graph. Coalescing reduces the number of LRs and re-
duces the degree of other nodes in the graph.



■ FIGURE 13.7 Structure of the Global Coloring Allocator.

Unfortunately, the graph update is conservative rather than precise (see
Section 13.4.3). Thus, if any LRs are combined, the allocator iterates the
Build–Coalesce process until it cannot coalesce any more LRs—typically
two to four iterations.

Estimate Spill Costs
The allocator computes, for each LR, an estimate of
The spill cost computation has many corner
cases (see Sections 13.2.3 and 13.4.4).
the runtime cost of spilling the entire LR. It adds the costs of the spills
and restores, each multiplied by the estimated execution frequency of the
block where the code would be inserted.

Find a Coloring
The allocator tries to construct a k-coloring for the in-
terference graph. It uses a two-phase process: graph simplification to
construct an order for coloring, then graph reconstruction that assigns
colors as it reinserts each node back into the graph.

If the allocator finds a k-coloring, it rewrites the code and exits. If any
nodes remain uncolored, the allocator invokes Insert Spills to spill the un-
colored LRs. It then restarts the allocator on the modified code.

The second and subsequent attempts at coloring take less time than the
first try because coalescing in the first pass has reduced the size of both
the problem and the interference graph.

Insert Spills
For each uncolored LR, the allocator inserts a spill after each
definition and a restore before each use. This converts the uncolored LR
into a set of tiny LRs, one at each reference. This modified program is
easier to color than the original code.

The following subsections describe these phases in more detail.

13.4.1 Find Global Live Ranges

As its first step, the global allocator constructs maximal-sized global live
ranges (see Section 13.2.1). A global LR is a set of definitions and uses that
contains all of the uses that a definition in the set can reach, along with all



GRAPH COLORING
Graph coloring is a common paradigm for global register allocation. For an
arbitrary graph G, a coloring of G assigns a color to each node in G so that no
pair of adjacent nodes has the same color. A coloring that uses k colors is
termed a k-coloring, and the smallest such k for a given graph is called the
graph’s minimum chromatic number. Consider the following graphs:

The graph on the left is two-colorable. For example, we can assign blue to
nodes 1 and 5, and red to nodes 2, 3, and 4. Adding the edge (2, 3), as shown
on the right, makes the graph three-colorable, but not two-colorable.
(Assign blue to nodes 1 and 5, red to nodes 2 and 4, and yellow to node 3.)

For a given graph, finding its minimum chromatic number is NP-complete.
Similarly, determining if a graph is k-colorable, for fixed k, is NP-complete.
Graph coloring allocators use approximate methods to find colorings that fit
the available resources.

The maximum degree of any node in a graph gives an upper bound on the
graph’s chromatic number. A graph with maximum degree of x can always
be colored with x + 1 colors. The two graphs shown above demonstrate that
degree is a loose upper bound. Both graphs have maximum degree of three.
Both graphs have colorings with fewer than four colors. In each case,
high-degree nodes have neighbors that can receive the same color.

of the definitions that can reach those uses. Thus, the LR forms a complex
web of definitions and uses that, ideally, should reside in a single PR.

The algorithm to construct live ranges is straightforward if the allocator can
work from the SSA form of the code. Thus, the first step in finding live
ranges is to convert the input code to SSA form, if necessary. The allocator
can then build maximal-sized live ranges with a simple approach: at each
φ-function, combine all of the names, both definition and uses, into a single
LR. If the allocator applies this rule at each φ-function, it creates the set of
maximal global LRs.



■ FIGURE 13.8 Discovering Live Ranges.

To make this process efficient, the compiler can use the disjoint-set union-
find algorithm. To start, it assigns a unique set name to each SSA name.
Next, it visits each φ-function in the code and unions together the sets asso-
ciated with each φ-function parameter and the set for the φ-function result.
After all of the φ-functions have been processed, each remaining unique set
becomes an LR. The allocator can either rewrite the code to use LR names
or it can create and maintain a mapping between SSA names and LR names.
In practice, the former approach seems simpler.

Since the process of finding LRs does not move any definitions or uses,
translation out of SSA form is trivial. The LR name space captures the ef-
fects that would require new copies during out-of-SSA translation. Thus, the
compiler can simply drop the φ-functions and SSA-names during renaming.

Fig. 13.8(a) shows a code fragment in semipruned SSA form that involves
source-code variables, a, b, c, and d. To find the live ranges, the allocator
assigns each SSA name a set that contains its name. It unions together the
sets associated with names used in the φ-function, {d0} ∪ {d1} ∪ {d2}. This
gives a final set of four LRs: LRa = {a0}, LRb = {b0}, LRc = {c0}, and
LRd = {d0,d1,d2}. Fig. 13.8(b) shows the code rewritten to use the LRs.

13.4.2 Build an Interference Graph

To model interferences, the global allocator builds an interference graph,
I = (N,E). Nodes in N represent individual live ranges and edges in E repre-
sent interferences between live ranges. Thus, an undirected edge (ni, nj) ∈ E
exists if and only if the corresponding live ranges LRi and LRj interfere.
The interference graph for the code in Fig. 13.8(b) appears in the margin.



■ FIGURE 13.9 Constructing the Interference Graph.

LRa interferes with each of LRb, LRc, and LRd. None of LRb, LRc, or LRd
interfere with each other; they could share a single PR.

If the compiler can color I with k or fewer colors, then it can map the colors
directly onto PRs to produce a legal allocation. In the example, LRa inter-
feres with each of LRb, LRc, and LRd. In a coloring, LRa must receive its
own color and, in an allocation, it cannot share a PR with LRb, LRc, or LRd.
The other live ranges do not interfere with each other. Thus, LRb, LRc, and
LRd could share a single color and, in the code, a single PR. This interfer-
ence graph is two-colorable, and the code can be rewritten to use just two
registers.

Now, consider what would happen if another phase of the compiler re-
ordered the last two definitions in B1, as shown in the margin. This change
makes LRb live at the definition of LRd. It adds an edge (LRb,LRd) to
the interference graph, which makes the graph three-colorable rather than
two-colorable. (The graph is small enough to prove this by enumeration.)
With this new graph, the allocator has two options: to use three registers,
or, if only two registers are available, to spill one of LRb or LRa before the
definition of LRd in B1. Alternatively, the allocator could reorder the two
operations and eliminate the interference between LRb and LRd. Typically,
register allocators do not reorder operations. Instead, allocators assume a
fixed order of operations and leave ordering questions to the instruction
scheduler (see Chapter 12).

Given the code, renamed into LRs, and LIVEOUT sets for each block in the
renamed code, the allocator can build the interference graph in one pass
over each block, as shown in Fig. 13.9. The algorithm walks the block, from
bottom to top. At each operation, it computes LIVENOW, the set of values
Section 11.3.2 also uses LIVENOW.
that are live at the current operation. At the bottom of the block, LIVEOUT
and LIVENOW must be identical. As the algorithm walks backward through



the block, it adds the appropriate interference edges to the graph and updates
the LIVENOW set to reflect each operation’s impact.

The algorithm implements the definition of interference given earlier: LRi
and LRj interfere only if LRi is live at a definition of LRj, or vice versa. The
allocator adds, at each operation, an interference between the defined LR
and each LR that is live after the operation.

Copy operations require special treatment. A copy LRi ⇒ LRj does not cre-
ate an interference between LRi and LRj because the two live ranges have
the same value after the copy executes and, thus, could occupy the same reg-
ister. If subsequent context creates an interference between these live ranges,
that operation will create the edge. Treating copies in this way creates an in-
terference graph that precisely captures when LRi and LRj can occupy the
same register. As the allocator encounters copies, it should create a list of
all the copy operations for later use in coalescing.

To improve the allocator’s efficiency, it should build both a lower-triangular
Insertion into the lists should check the
bit-matrix to avoid duplication.
bit matrix and a set of adjacency lists to represent E. The bit matrix allows a
constant-time test for interference, while the adjacency lists allow efficient
iteration over a node’s neighbors. The two-representation strategy uses more
space than a single representation would, but pays off in reduced allocation
time. As suggested in Section 13.2.4, the allocator can build separate graphs
for disjoint register classes, which reduces the maximum graph size.

13.4.3 Coalesce Copy Operations

The allocator can use the interference graph to implement a strong form
of copy coalescing. If the code contains a copy operation, LRi ⇒ LRj, and
the allocator can determine that LRi and LRj do not interfere at some other
operation, then the allocator can combine the LRs and remove the copy
operation. We say that the copy has been “coalesced.”

Coalescing a copy has several beneficial effects. It eliminates the actual copy
In his thesis, Briggs shows examples where
coalescing eliminates up to one-third of the
initial live ranges.
operation, which makes the code smaller and, potentially, faster. It reduces
the degree of any LR that previously interfered with both LRi and LRj. It
removes a node from the graph. Each of these effects makes the coloring
pass faster and more effective.

Fig. 13.10 shows a simple, single-block example. The original code appears
in panel (a). Intervals to the right indicate the extents of the live ranges that
are involved in the copy operation. Even though LRa overlaps both LRb
and LRc, it interferes with neither of them because the overlaps involve
copy operations. Since LRb is live at the definition of LRc, LRb and LRc
interfere. Both copy operations are candidates for coalescing.



■ FIGURE 13.10 Combining Live Ranges by Coalescing Copy Operations.

Fig. 13.10(b) shows the result of coalescing LRa and LRb to produce LRab.

LRab and LRc still do not interfere, because LRc is created by the copy
operation from LRab. Combining LRa and LRb reduces LR◦
v by one. Before
coalescing, both LRa and LRb interfered with LRv. After coalescing, those
values occupy a single LR rather than two LRs. In general, coalescing two
live ranges either decreases the degrees of their neighbors or leaves them
unchanged; it cannot increase their degrees.

To perform coalescing, the allocator walks the list of copies from Build Graph
The membership test should use the bit-
matrix for efficiency.
and inspects each operation, LRi ⇒ LRj. If (LRi, LRj) /∈ E, then LRi and LRj
do not interfere and the allocator combines them, eliminates the copy, and
updates I to reflect the new, combined LRij. The allocator can conservatively
update I by moving each edge from LRi and LRj to LRij, eliminating dupli-
cates. This update is not precise, but it lets the allocator continue coalescing.

In practice, allocators coalesce every live range that they can, given the in-
terferences in I. Then, they rewrite the code to reflect the revised LRs and
eliminate the coalesced copies. Next, they rebuild I and try again to coalesce
copies. This process typically halts after a couple of rounds of coalescing.

The example illustrates the imprecise nature of this conservative update to
the graph. The update moves the edge (LRb, LRc) from LRb to LRab, when,
in fact, LRab and LRc do not interfere. Rebuilding the graph from the trans-
formed code yields the precise interference graph, without (LRab, LRc). At
that point, the allocator can coalesce LRab and LRc.

If the allocator can coalesce LRi with either LRj or LRk, choosing to form

LRij may prevent a subsequent coalesce with LRk, or vice versa. Thus,
the order of coalescing matters. In principle, the compiler should coalesce
the most frequently executed copies first. Thus, the allocator might coa-
lesce copies in order by the estimated execution frequency of the block that



contains the copy. To implement this, the allocator can consider the basic
blocks in order from most deeply nested to least deeply nested.

In practice, the cost of building the interference graph for the first round of
coalescing dominates the overall cost of the graph-coloring allocator. Sub-
sequent passes through the build-coalesce loop process a smaller graph and,
therefore, run more quickly. To reduce the cost of coalescing, the compiler
This strategy applies a lesson from
semipruned SSA form: only include the
names that matter.
can build a subset of the interference graph—one that only includes live
ranges involved in a copy operation.

13.4.4 Estimate Global Spill Costs

When a register allocator discovers that it cannot keep all of the live ranges
in registers, it must select an LR to spill. Typically, the allocator uses some
carefully designed metric to rank the choices and picks the LR that its metric
suggests is the best spill candidate. The local allocator used the distance to
the LR’s next use, which works well in a single-block context. In the global
allocator, the metric incorporates an estimate of the runtime costs that will
be incurred by spilling and restoring a particular LR.

To compute the estimated spill costs for an LR, the allocator must examine
each definition and use in the LR. At each definition, it estimates the cost
of a spill after the definition and multiplies that number by the estimated
execution frequency of the block that contains the definition. At each use,
it estimates the cost of a restore before the use and multiplies that number
by the estimated execution frequency of the block that contains the use. It
sums together the estimated costs for each definition and use in the LR to
produce a single number. This number becomes the spill cost for the LR.

Of course, the actual computation is more complex than the preceding ex-
planation suggests. At a given definition or use of an LR, the value might
be any of dirty, clean, or rematerializable (see Section 13.2.3). Individual
definitions and uses within an LR can have different classifications, so the
allocator must perform enough analysis to classify each reference in the LR.
That classification determines the cost to spill or restore that reference.

The precise execution count of a block is difficult to determine. Fortunately,
relative execution frequencies are sufficient to guide spill decisions; the allo-
cator needs to know that one reference is likely to execute much more often
than another. Thus, the allocator derives, for each block, a number that in-
dicates its relative execution frequency. Those frequencies apply uniformly
to each reference in the block.

The allocator could compute spill costs on demand—when it needs to make
a spill decision. If it finds a k-coloring without any spills, an on-demand



cost computation would reduce overall allocation time. If the allocator must
spill frequently, a batch cost computation would, most likely, be faster than
an on-demand computation.

Fig. 13.7 suggests that the allocator should perform the cost computation
before it tries to color the graph. The allocator can defer the computation
until the first time that it needs to spill. If the allocator does not need to spill,
it avoids the overhead of computing spill costs; if it does spill, it computes
spill costs for a smaller set of LRs.

Accounting for Execution Frequencies

To compute spill costs, the allocator needs an estimate of the execution
Using the 10d estimator can introduce a
problem with integer overflow in the spill
cost computation.

Many compiler writers have discovered this
issue experimentally. Deeply nested loops
may need floating-point spill costs.

frequency for each basic block. The compiler can derive these estimates
from profile data or from heuristics. Many compilers assume that each loop
executes 10 times, which creates a weight of 10d for a block nested in-
side d loops. This assumption assigns a weight of 10 to a block inside one
loop, 100 to a block inside two nested loops, and so on. An unpredictable
if–then–else would decrease the estimated frequency by half. In practice,
these estimates create a large enough bias to encourage spilling LRs in outer
loops rather than those in inner loops.

Negative Spill Costs

A live range that contains a load, a store, and no other uses should receive
a negative spill cost if the load and store refer to the same address. (Opti-
mization can create such live ranges; for example, if the use were optimized
away and the store resulted from a procedure call rather than the definition
of a new value.) Sometimes, spilling a live range may eliminate copy oper-
ations with a higher cost than the spill operations; such a live range also has
a negative cost. Any live range with a negative spill cost should be spilled,
since doing so decreases demand for registers and removes operations from
the code.

Infinite Spill Costs

Some live ranges are so short that spilling them does not help. Consider the
LR i ← ···

Mem[LR j ] ← LR i

LRi has spill cost ∞

short LR shown in the left margin. If the allocator tries to spill LRi, it will
insert a store after the definition and a load before the use, creating two new
LRs. Neither of these new LRs uses fewer registers than the original LR, so
the spill produces no benefit. The allocator should assign the original LR
a spill cost of infinity, ensuring that the allocator does not try to spill it. In
general, an LR should have infinite spill cost if no other LR ends between its
definitions and its uses. This condition stipulates that availability of registers
does not change between the definitions and uses.



initialize the stack and the spill list to empty

while (N ̸= ∅) do
if ∃ n ∈ N with n◦ < k then
node ← n
else node ← n picked by the spill metric

remove node and its edges from I
push node onto stack

while (stack ̸= ∅) do

node ← pop(stack)

insert node and its edges into I

assign node a color not used

by any of its neighbors

(a) The Algorithm for Simplify
(b) The Algorithm for Select

■ FIGURE 13.11 Simplify and Select: The Core Coloring Algorithm.

Infinite-cost live ranges present a code-shape challenge to the compiler. If
the code contains more than k − 1 nested infinite-cost LRs, and no LR ends
in this region, then the infinite-cost LRs form an uncolorable clique in the
interference graph. While such a situation is unusual, we have seen it arise in
practice. The register allocator cannot fix this problem; the compiler writer
must simply ensure that the allocator does not receive such code.

13.4.5 Color the Graph

The global allocator colors the graph in a two-step process. The first step,
called Simplify, computes an order in which to attempt the coloring. The
second step, called Select, considers each node, in order, and tries to assign
it a color from its set of k colors.

To color the graph, the allocator relies on a simple observation:

If a node has fewer than k neighbors, then it must receive a color,
independent of the colors assigned to its neighbors.

Thus, any node n with degree less than k, denoted n◦ < k, is trivial to color.
The allocator first tries to color those nodes that are hard to color; it defers
trivially colored nodes until after the difficult nodes have been colored.

Simplify

To compute an order for coloring, the allocator finds trivially colored nodes
and removes them from the graph. It records the order of removal by pushing
the nodes onto a stack as they are removed. The act of removing a node and
its edges from the graph lowers the degree of all its neighbors. Fig. 13.11(a)
shows the algorithm.

As nodes are removed from the graph, the allocator must preserve both the
node and its edges for subsequent reinsertion in Select. The allocator can
either build a structure to record them, or it can add a mark to each edge and
each node indicating whether or not it is active.



Simplify uses two distinct mechanisms to select the node to remove next. If
there exists a node n with n◦ < k, the allocator chooses that node. Because
these nodes are trivially colored, the order in which they are removed does
not matter. If all remaining nodes are constrained, with degree ≥ k, then
the allocator picks a node to remove based on its spill metric. Any node n
Spill metric
a heuristic used to select an LR to spill
removed by this process has n◦ ≥ k; thus, it may not receive a color during
the assignment phase. The loop halts when the graph is empty. At that point,
the stack contains all the nodes in order of removal.

Select

To color the graph, the allocator rebuilds the interference graph in the re-
verse of the removal order. It repeatedly pops a node n from the stack, inserts
n and its edges back into I, and picks a color for n that is distinct from n’s
neighbors. Fig. 13.11(b) shows the algorithm.

To select a color for node n, the allocator tallies the colors of n’s neighbors
In our experience, the order in which the
allocator considers colors has little practical
impact.
in the current graph and assigns n an unused color. It can search the set of
colors in a consistent order, or it can assign colors in a round-robin fashion.
If no color remains for n, it is left uncolored.

When the stack is empty, I has been rebuilt. If every node has a color, the
allocator rewrites the code, replacing LR names with PR names, and returns.
If any nodes remain uncolored, the allocator spills the corresponding LRs.
The allocator passes a list of the uncolored LRs to Insert Spills, which adds
the spills and restores to the code. Insert Spills then restarts the allocator on
the revised code. The process repeats until every node in I receives a color.
Typically, the allocator finds a coloring and halts in a couple of trips around
the large loop in Fig. 13.7.

Why Does This Work?

The global allocator inserts each node back into the graph from which it
was removed. If the reduction algorithm removes the node for LRn from I
because n◦ < k, then it reinserts LRn into a graph in which n◦ < k and node
n is trivially colored.

The only way that a node n can fail to receive a color is if n was removed
from I using the spill metric. Select reinserts such a node into a graph in
which n◦ ≥ k. Notice, however, that this condition is a statement about de-
gree in the graph, rather than a statement about the availability of colors.

If node n’s neighbors use all k colors, then the allocator finds no color for n.
If, instead, they use fewer than k colors, then the allocator finds a color for
n. In practice, a node n often has multiple neighbors that use the same color.
Thus, Select often finds colors for some of these constrained nodes.



UPDATING THE INTERFERENCE GRAPH
Both coalescing and spilling change the set of nodes and edges in the
interference graph. In each case, the graph must be updated before
allocation can proceed.

The global coloring allocator uses a conservative update after each coalesce;
that update also triggers another iteration around the Build–Coalesce loop in
Fig. 13.7. It obtains precision in the graph by rebuilding it from scratch.

The allocator defers spill insertion until the end of the Simplify–Select process;
it then inserts all of the spill code and triggers another iteration of the
Build–Coalesce–Spill Costs–Color loop. Again, it obtains precision by
rebuilding the graph.

If the allocator could update the graph precisely, it could eliminate both of
the cycles shown in Fig. 13.7. Coalescing could complete in a single pass. It
could insert spill code incrementally when it discovered an uncolored node;
the updated graph would correctly reflect interferences for color selection.

Better incremental updates can reduce allocation time. A precise update
would produce the same allocation as the original allocator, within variance
caused by changes in the order of decisions. An imprecise but conservative
update could produce faster allocations, albeit with some potential decrease
in code quality from the imprecision in the graph. DasGupta

Simplify determines the order in which Select tries to color nodes. This order
plays a critical role in determining which nodes receive colors. For a node
n removed from the graph because n◦ < k, the order is unimportant with
respect to the nodes that remain in the graph. The order may be important
with respect to nodes already on the stack; after all, n may have been con-
strained until some of those earlier nodes were removed. For nodes removed
from the graph using the spill metric, the order is crucial. The else clause
in Fig. 13.11(a) executes only when every remaining node has degree ≥ k.
Thus, the nodes that remain in the graph at that point are in more heavily
connected subgraphs of I.

The order of the constrained nodes is determined by the spill metric.
The original global coloring allocator ap-
peared in IBM’s PL.8 compiler.
The original coloring allocator picked a node that minimized the ratio of
cost ÷ degree, where cost is the estimated spill cost and degree is the node’s
degree in the current graph. This metric balances between spill cost and the
number of nodes whose degree will decrease.

Other spill metrics have been tried. Several metrics are variations on
cost ÷ degree, including cost ÷ degree2, cost ÷ area and cost ÷ area2, where
the area of an LR is defined as the sum of MAXLIVE taken over all the



instructions that lie within the LR. These metrics try to balance the cost of
spilling a specific LR against the extent to which that spill makes it easier to
color the rest of the graph. Straight cost has been tried; it focuses on runtime
speed. In code-space sensitive applications, a metric of total spill operations
can drive down the code-space growth from spilling.

In practice, no single heuristic dominates the others. Since coloring is fast
relative to building I, the allocator can color I with several different spill
metrics and keep the best result.

13.4.6 Insert Spill and Restore Code

The spill code created by a global register allocator is no more complex than
the spill code inserted in the local allocator. Insert Spills receives a list of LRs
that did not receive a color. For each LR, it inserts the appropriate code after
each definition and before each use.

The same complexities that arose in the local allocator apply in the global
case. The allocator should recognize the distinction between dirty values,
clean values, and rematerializable values. In practice, it becomes more com-
plex to recognize whether a value is dirty, clean, or rematerializable in the
global scope.

The global allocator applies a spill everywhere discipline. An uncolored live
range is spilled at every definition point and restored at every use point. In
practice, a spilled LR often has definitions and uses that occur in regions
where PRs are available. Several authors have looked at techniques to loosen
the spill everywhere discipline so as to keep spilled LRs in PRs in regions
of low register pressure (see the discussions in Section 13.5).

13.4.7 Handling Overlapping Register Classes

In practice, the register allocator must deal with the idiosyncratic properties
of the target machine’s register set and its calling convention. This reality
constrains both allocation and assignment.

For example, on the ARM A-64, the four floating-point registers Q1, D1, S1,

127
63
0

Q0
D0
S0
H0

···

Q31
D31
S31 H31

Floating-Point Registers

63
0

X0
W0

···

X31
W31

General Purpose Registers

Register Names on the ARM A-64

and H1 all share space in a single PR, as shown in the margin. Thus, if the
compiler allocates D1 to hold LRi, Q1, S1, and H1 are unavailable while LRi is
live. Similar restrictions arise with the overlapped general purpose registers,
such as the pair X3 and W3.

To understand how overlapping register classes affect the structure of a reg-
ister allocator, consider how the local allocator might be modified to handle
the ARM A-64 general purpose registers.



■
The algorithm, as presented, uses one attribute to describe an LR, its
virtual register number. With overlapping classes, such as Xi and Wi,
each LR also needs an attribute to describe its class.

■
The stack of free registers should use names drawn from one of the two
sets of names, Xi or Wi. The state, allocated or free, of a coresident pair
such as X0 and W0 is identical.

■
The mappings VRToPR, PRToVR, and PRNU can also remain single-valued.
If VRi has an allocated register, VRToPR will map the VR’s num field to
a register number and its class field will indicate whether to use the X
name or the W name.

Because the local algorithm has a simple way of modeling the status of the

PRs, the extensions are straightforward.

To handle a more complex situation, such as the EAX register on the IA-32,
31
15
7
0

EAX
AH
AL

ECX
CH
CL

EDX
DH
DL

EBX
BH
BL

EBP
BP

ESP
SP

ESI
SI

EDI
DI

Intel IA-32 Register Names

the local allocator would need more extensive modifications. Use of EAX
requires the entire register and precludes simultaneous use of AH or AL. Sim-
ilarly, use of either AH or AL precludes simultaneous use of EAX. However,
the allocator can use both AL and AH at the same time. Similar idiosyncratic
rules apply to the other overlapping names, shown in the margin and in
Fig. 13.2(b).

The global graph-coloring allocators have more complex models for inter-
ference and register availability than the local allocator. To adapt them for
fair use of overlapping register classes requires a more involved approach.

Describing Register Classes

Before we can describe a systematic way to handle allocation and assign-
ment for multiple register classes, we need a systematic way to describe
those classes. The compiler can represent the members of each class with a
set. From Fig. 13.2(a), the ARM A-64 has six classes:

Q: {Q0, Q1, ..., Q31}
D: {D0, D1, ..., D31}
S: {S0, S1, ..., S31}

H: {H0, H1, ..., H31}
X: {X0, X1, ..., X31}
W: {W0, W1, ..., W31}

Thus, class(D3) = {D0, D1, ..., D31}, the set of 64-bit floating-point registers.

The simplest scheme to describe overlap between register classes is to in-
troduce a function, alias(r). For a register name r, alias(r) maps r to the set
of register names that occupy physical space that intersects with r’s space.
In the ARM A-64, alias(W1) = {X1} and alias(S2) = {Q2, D2, H2}. Similarly,
in IA-32, alias(AH) = {EAX}, alias(AL) = {EAX}, and alias(EAX) = {AL, AH}.
Because AL and AH occupy disjoint space, they are not aliases of each other.



The compiler can compute the information that it will need for allocation
and assignment from the class and alias relationships.

Coloring with Overlapping Classes

The presence of overlapping register classes complicates each of coloring,
assignment, and coalescing.

Coloring

The graph-coloring allocator approximates colorability by comparing a
node’s degree against the number of available colors. If n◦ < k, the num-
ber of available registers, then Simplify categorizes n as trivially colored,
removes n from the graph, and pushes n onto the ordering stack. If the
graph contains no trivially colored node, Simplify chooses the next node for
removal using its spill metric.

The presence of multiple register classes means that k may vary across
classes. For the node n that represents LRn, k = | class(LRn) |.

The presence of overlapping register classes further complicates the ap-
proximation of colorability. If the LR’s class has no aliases, then simple
arithmetic applies; a single neighbor reduces the supply of possible registers
by one. If the LR’s class has aliases—that is, register classes overlap—then
it may be the case that a single neighbor can reduce the supply of possible
registers by more than one.

■
In IA-32, EAX removes both AH and AL; it reduces the pool of 8-bit reg-
isters by two. The relationship is not symmetric; use of AL does not
preclude use of AH. Unaligned floating-point register pairs create a more
general version of this problem.

■
By contrast, the ARM A-64 ensures that each neighbor counts as one
register. For example, W2 occupies the low-order 32 bits of an X2 register;
no name exists for X2’s high-order bits. Floating-point registers have the
same property; only one name at each precision is associated with a
given 128-bit register (Qi).

To extend Simplify to work fairly and correctly with overlapping register
classes, we must replace n◦ < k with an estimator that conservatively and
correctly estimates colorability in the more complex case of overlapping
register classes. Rather than tallying n’s neighbors, we must count those
neighbors with which n competes for registers.

Smith, Ramsey, and Holloway describe an efficient estimator that provides
a fair and correct estimate of colorability. Their allocator precomputes sup-
porting data from the class and alias relationships and then estimates n’s



colorability based on n’s class and the registers assigned to its relevant
neighbors.

Assignment

Traditional discussions of graph-coloring allocators assume that the assign-
ment of specific registers to specific live ranges does not have a significant
impact on colorability. The literature ignores the difference between choos-
ing colors “round-robin” and “first-in, first-out,” except in unusual cases,
such as biased coloring (see Section 13.5.1).

With overlapping register classes, some register choices can tie up more
than one register. In IA-32, using EAX reduces the supply of eight bit reg-
isters by two, AH and AL, rather than one. Again, unaligned floating-point
register pairs create a more general version of the problem. Just as one reg-
ister assignment can conflict with multiple others, so too can one assignment
alter the available incremental choices.

Consider looking for a single eight bit register on IA-32. If the available
options were AL and CL, but AH was occupied and CH was not, then choosing
AL might introduce fewer constraints. Because EAX already conflicts with AH,
the choice of AL does not reduce the set of available E registers. By con-
trast, choosing CL would make ECX unavailable. Overlapping register classes
complicate assignment enough to suggest that the allocator should choose
registers with a more complex mechanism than the first-in, first-out stack
from Section 13.3.

Coalescing

The compiler should only coalesce two LRs, LRi and LRj, if the resulting
live range has a feasible register class. If both are general purpose registers,
for example, then the combination works. If class(LRi) contains only PR2
and class(LRj) contains only PR4, then the allocator must recognize that
the combined LRij would be overconstrained (see the further discussion in
Section 13.5.1).

Coloring with Disjoint Classes

If the architecture contains sets of classes that are disjoint, the compiler can
allocate them separately. For example, most processors provide separate
resources for general purpose registers and floating-point registers. Thus,
allocation of LRi to a floating-point register has no direct impact on allo-
cation in the general purpose register set. Because spills of floating-point
values may create values that need general purpose registers, the floating-
point allocation should precede the general purpose allocation.



If the allocator builds separate graphs for disjoint subclasses, it can reduce
the number of nodes in the interference graph, which can yield significant
compile-time savings, particularly during Build Graph.

Forcing Specific Register Placement

The allocator must handle operations that require placement of live ranges
in specific PRs. These constraints may be either restrictions (LRi must be in
PRj) or exclusions (LRi cannot be in PRk).

These constraints arise from several sources. The linkage convention dic-

On IA-32, AX describes a 16-bit register that
overlaps AH and AL. Similarly, DX overlaps DH
and DL.

tates the placement of values that are passed in registers; these constraints
include the ARP, some or all of the actual parameters, and the return value.
Some hardware operations may require their operands in particular regis-
ters; for example, the 16-bit signed multiply on the IA-32 always reads an
argument from AX and writes to both AX and DX.

The register class mechanism creates a simple way to handle such restric-
tions. The compiler writer creates a small register class for this purpose and
attaches that class to the appropriate LRs. The coloring mechanism handles
the rest of the details.

To handle exclusions, the compiler writer can build an exclusion set, again,
a list of PRs, and attach it to specific LRs. The coloring mechanism can
test prospective choices against the exclusion set. For example, between the
code that saves the caller-saves registers and the code that restores them,
the allocator should not use the caller-saves registers to hold anything other
than a temporary value. A simple exclusion set will ensure this safe behav-
ior.

SECTION REVIEW
Global register allocators operate over entire procedures. The presence of
control flow makes global allocation more complex than local allocation.
Most global allocators operate on the graph coloring paradigm. The
allocator builds a graph that represents interferences between live ranges,
and then it tries to find a coloring that fits into the available registers.

This section describes a global allocator that uses a precise interference
graph and careful spill cost estimates. The precise interference graph
enables a powerful copy-coalescing phase. The allocator spills with a simple
greedy selection-heuristic and a spill-everywhere discipline. These choices
lead to an efficient implementation.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Simplify always removes trivially colored nodes (n◦ < k) before it re-
moves any constrained node (n◦ ≥ k). This suggests that it only spills
a node that has at least k neighbors that are, themselves, constrained.
Sketch a version of Simplify that uses this more precise criterion. How
does its compile-time cost compare to the original algorithm? Do you
expect it to produce different results?

2.
The global allocator chooses a value to spill by finding the LR that min-
imizes some metric, such as spill cost ÷ degree. When the algorithm
runs, it sometimes must choose several live ranges to spill before it
makes any other live range unconstrained. Explain how this situation
can happen. Can you envision a spill metric that avoids this problem?

13.5 ADVANCED TOPICS

Because the cost of a misstep during register allocation can be high, algo-
rithms for register allocation have received a great deal of attention. Many
variations on the global coloring allocator have been described in the litera-
ture and implemented in practice. Sections 13.5.1 and 13.5.2 describe other
approaches to coalescing and spilling, respectively. Section 13.5.3 presents
three different formulations of live ranges; each of these leads to a distinctly
different allocator.

13.5.1 Variations on Coalescing

The coalescing algorithm presented earlier combines live ranges without re-
gard to the colorability of the resulting live range. Several more conservative
approaches have been proposed in the literature.

Conservative and Iterated Coalescing

Coalescing has both positive and negative effects. As mentioned earlier, co-
alescing LRi and LRj can reduce the degree of other LRs that interfere with
both of them. However, LR◦
ij ≥ MAX(LR◦
i , LR◦
j ). If both LRi and LRj are
trivially colored and LR◦
ij ≥ k, then coalescing LRi and LRj increases the
number of constrained LRs in the graph, which may or may not make the
graph harder to color without spilling.

Conservative coalescing attempts to limit the negative side effects of co-
Conservative coalescing
The allocator only coalesces LRi ⇒ LRj if
the resulting LR does not make the graph
harder to color.

alescing by only combining LRi and LRj if the result does not make the
interference graph harder to color. Taken literally, this statement suggests
the following condition:



Either LR◦
ij ≤ MAX(LR◦
i ,LR◦
j ) or LRij has fewer than k neighbors
with degree > k.

This condition is subtle. If one of LRi or LRj already has significant degree
and coalescing LRi and LRj produces an LR with the same degree, then
the result is no harder to color than the original graph. In fact, the coalesce
would lower the degree of any LR that interfered with both LRi and LRj.

The second condition specifies that LRij should have the property that Sim-
Comparisons against k must use the appro-
priate value for class(LRi) and class(LRj).
plify and Select will find a color for LRij. Say the allocator can coalesce LRi
and LRj to create LRij. If LRij has degree greater than the two LRs that it
replaces, but will still color, then the allocator can combine LRi and LRj.
(The coalesce is still conservative.)

Conservative coalescing is attractive precisely because it cannot make the
coloring problem worse. It does, however, prevent the compiler from coa-
lescing some copies. Since degree is a loose upper bound on colorability,
conservative coalescing may prevent some beneficial combinations and,
thus, produce more spills than unconstrained coalescing.

Biased Coloring

Another way to coalesce copies without making the graph harder to color is
Biased coloring
If LRi and LRj are connected by a copy,
the allocator tries to assign them the same
color.

to bias the choice of specific colors. Biased coloring defers coalescing into
Select; it changes the color selection process. In picking a color for LRi, it
first tries colors that have been assigned to live ranges connected to LRj by
a copy operation. If it can assign LRi a color already assigned to LRj, then
a copy from LRi to LRj, or from LRj to LRi, is redundant and the allocator
can eliminate the copy operation.

To make this process efficient, the allocator can build, for each LR, a list
of the other LRs to which it is connected by a copy. Select can then use
these partner lists to quickly determine if some available color would allow
the LR to combine with one of its partners. With a careful implementation,
biased coloring adds little or no cost to the color selection process.

Iterated Coalescing

In an allocator that uses conservative coalescing, some copies will remain
Iterated coalescing
The allocator repeats conservative coalesc-
ing before it decides to spill an LR.
uncoalesced because the resulting LR would have high degree. Iterated co-
alescing addresses this problem by attempting to coalesce, conservatively,
before deciding to spill. Simplify removes nodes from the graph until no triv-
ially colored node remains. At that point it repeats the coalescing phase.
Copies that did not coalesce in the earlier graphs may coalesce in the re-
duced graph. If coalescing creates more trivially colored nodes, Simplify



continues by removing those nodes. If not, it selects spill candidates from
the graph until it creates one or more trivially colored nodes.

13.5.2 Variations on Spilling

The allocator described in Section 13.4 uses a “spill everywhere” discipline.
In practice, an allocator can do a more precise job of spilling to relieve
pressure in regions of high demand for registers. This observation has led to
several interesting improvements on the spill-everywhere allocator.

Spilling Partial Live Ranges

The global allocator, as described, spills entire live ranges. This strategy can
lead to overspilling if the demand for registers is low through most of the live
range and high in a small region. More sophisticated spilling techniques find
the regions where spilling a live range is productive—that is, the spill frees
a register in a region where a register is truly needed. The global allocator
can achieve similar results by spilling only in the region where interference
occurs. One technique, called interference-region spilling, identifies a set
of live ranges that interfere in the region of high demand and spills them
only in that region. The allocator can estimate the costs of several spilling
strategies for the interference region and compare those costs against the
standard spill-everywhere approach. This kind of estimated-cost competi-
tion has been shown to improve overall allocation.

Clean Spilling

When the global allocator spills some LRi, it inserts a spill after every def-
inition and a restore before every use. If LRi has multiple uses in a block
where register pressure is low, a careful implementation can keep the value
of LRi in a register for its live subrange in that block. This improvement,
sometimes called clean spilling, tries to ensure that a given LR is only re-
stored once in a given block.

A variation on this idea would use a more general postpass over the allocated
code to recognize regions where free registers are available and promote
spilled values back into registers in those regions. This approach has been
called register scavenging.

Rematerialization

Some values cost less to recompute than to spill. For example, small integer
constants should be recreated with a load immediate rather than being re-
trieved from memory with a load. The allocator can recognize such values
and rematerialize them rather than spill them.



Modifying a global graph-coloring allocator to perform rematerialization
takes several small changes. The allocator must identify and tag SSA names
that can be rematerialized. For example, any operation whose arguments
are always available is a candidate. It can propagate these rematerialization
tags over the code using a variant of the SSCP algorithm for constant-
propagation described in Chapter 9. In forming live ranges, the allocator
should only combine SSA names that have identical rematerialization tags.

The compiler writer must make the spill-cost estimation handle rematerial-
ization tags correctly, so that these values have accurate spill-cost estimates.
The spill-code insertion process must also examine the tags and generate the
appropriate lightweight spills for rematerializable values. Finally, the allo-
cator should use conservative coalescing to avoid prematurely combining
live ranges with distinct rematerialization tags.

Live-Range Splitting

Spill code insertion changes both the code and the coloring problem. An
uncolored LR is broken into a series of tiny LRs, one at each definition
or use. The allocator can use a similar effect to improve allocation; it can
deliberately split high-degree LRs in ways that either improve colorability
or localize spilling.

Live-range splitting harnesses three distinct effects. If the split LRs have
lower degrees than the original one, they may be easier to color—possibly
even unconstrained. If some of the split LRs have high degree and, therefore,
spill, then splitting may let the allocator avoid spilling other parts of the
LR that have lower degree. Finally, splitting introduces spills at the points
where the LR is broken. Careful selection of the split points can control the
placement of some spill code—for example, encouraging spill code that lies
outside of loops rather than inside of them.

Many approaches to splitting have been tried. One early coloring allocator
broke uncolored LRs into block-sized LRs and then coalesced them back
together when the coalesce did not make allocation harder, similar to conser-
vative coalescing. Several approaches that use properties of the control-flow
graph to choose split points have been tried. Results can be inconsistent; the
underlying problems are still NP-complete.

Two particular techniques show promise. A method called zero-cost split-
ting capitalizes on nops in the instruction schedule to split LRs and improve
both allocation and scheduling. A technique called passive splitting uses a
directed interference graph to choose which LRs to split and where to split
them; it decides between splitting and spilling based on the estimated costs
of each alternative.



Implementing Splitting

The mechanics of introducing splits into a live range can be tricky. Briggs
suggested a separate split operation that had the same behavior as a copy.
His allocator used aggressive coalescing on copy operations. After the
copies had been coalesced, it used conservative coalescing on the splits.

Promotion of Ambiguous Values

In code that makes heavy use of ambiguous values, whether derived from
source-language pointers, array references, or object references whose class
cannot be determined at compile time, the allocator’s inability to keep such
values in registers is a serious performance issue. To improve allocation
of ambiguous values, several systems have included transformations that
rewrite the code to keep unambiguous values in scalar local variables, even
when their “natural” home is inside an array element or a pointer-based
structure.

■
Scalar replacement uses array-subscript analysis to identify reuse of
array-element values and to introduce scalar temporary variables that
hold reused values.

■
Register promotion uses data-flow analysis of pointer values to find
pointer-based values that can safely reside in a register throughout a loop
nest. It rewrites the code to keep the value in a local scalar variable.

Both of these transformations encode the results of analysis into the shape
of the code and make it obvious to the register allocator that these values
can be kept in registers.

Promotion can increase the demand for registers. In fact, promoting too
many values can produce spill code whose cost is greater than that of the
memory operations that the transformation tries to avoid. Ideally, the pro-
motion technique should use a measure of register pressure to help decide
which values to promote. Unfortunately, good estimators for register pres-
sure are hard to construct.

13.5.3 Other Forms of Live Ranges

The allocator in Section 13.4 operates over maximal-sized live ranges. Other
allocators have used different notions of a live range, which changes both the
allocator and the resulting allocation. These changes produce both beneficial
and detrimental effects.

Shorter live ranges produce, in some cases, interference graphs that contain
more trivially colored nodes. Consider a value that is live in one block with
register pressure greater than k and in many blocks where demand is less



than k. With maximal-sized LRs, the entire LR is nontrivial to color; with
shorter LRs, some of these LRs may be trivially colored. This effect can
lead to better register use in the areas of low pressure. On the downside, the
shorter LRs still represent a single value. Thus, they must connect through
copy operations or memory operations, which themselves have a cost.

Maximal-sized live ranges can produce general graphs. More precisely, for
any graph, we can construct a procedure whose interference graph is iso-
morphic to that graph. Restricting the form of LRs can restrict the form of
the interference graph. The following subsections describe three alternative
formulations for live ranges; they each provide a high-level description of
the allocators that result from these different formulations.

Each of these allocators represents a different point in the design space.
The Chapter Notes give references for
the reader interested in a more detailed
treatment of any of these allocators.
Changing the definition of a live range affects both the precision of the
interference graph and the cost of allocation. The tradeoffs are not straight-
forward, in large part because the underlying problems remain NP-complete
and the allocators compute a quick approximation to the optimal solution.

Allocation Based on SSA Names

The interference graphs that result from maximal-sized live ranges in pro-
grams are general graphs. For general graphs, the problem of finding a
k-coloring is NP-complete. There are, however, classes of graphs for which
k-coloring can be done in polynomial time.

In particular, the optimal coloring of a chordal graph can be found in
Chordal graph
a graph in which every cycle of more than
three nodes has a chord—an edge that joins
two nodes that are not adjacent in the cycle

O(|N| + |E|) time. The optimal coloring may use fewer colors, and thus
fewer registers, than the greedy heuristic approach shown in Section 13.4.5.
Of course, if the optimal coloring needs more than k colors, the allocator
will still need to spill.

If the compiler treats every distinct SSA-name as a live range, then the
resulting interference graph is a chordal graph. This observation sparked
interest in global register allocation over the SSA-form of the code. An

SSA-based allocator may find allocations that use fewer registers than the
allocations found by the global coloring allocator.

If the graph needs more than k colors, the allocator still must spill one or
more values. While SSA form does not lower the complexity of spill choice,
it may offer some benefits. Global live ranges tend to have longer lifetimes
than SSA names, which are broken by φ-functions at appropriate places in
the code, such as loop headers and blocks that follow loops. These breaks
give the allocator the chance to spill values over smaller regions than it may
have with global live ranges.



Unfortunately, SSA-based allocation leaves the code in SSA form. The allo-
If out-of-SSA translation needs to break
a cycle of copies, it will require an extra
register to do so.
cator, or a postpass, must translate out of SSA form, with all of the compli-
cations discussed in Section 9.3.5. That translation may increase demand for
registers. An SSA-based allocator must be prepared to handle this situation.

Equally important, that translation inserts copy operations into the code;
some of those copies may be extraneous. The allocator cannot coalesce
away copies that implement the flow of values corresponding to a φ-
function; to do so would destroy the chordal property of the graph. Thus, an

SSA-based allocator would probably use a coalescing algorithm that does
not use the interference graph. Several strong algorithms exist.

It is difficult to assess the relative merits of an SSA-based allocator and an
allocator based on maximal-sized live ranges. The SSA-based allocator has
the potential to obtain a better coloring than the traditional allocator, but it
does so on a different graph. Both allocators must address the problems of
spill choice and spill placement, which may contribute more to performance
than the actual coloring. The two allocators use different techniques for copy
coalescing. As with any register allocator, the actual implementation details
will matter.

Allocation Based on Linear Intervals

The live ranges used in local allocation form an interval graph. We can com-
Interval graph
a graph that depicts the intersections of
intervals on a line

An interval interference graph has a node
for each interval and an edge between two
nodes if their intervals intersect.

pute the minimal coloring of an interval graph in linear time. A family of
allocators called linear scan allocators capitalize on this observation; these
allocators are efficient in terms of compile time.

Linear scan allocators ignore control flow and treat the entire procedure as
a linear list of operations. The allocator represents the LR of a value v as
an interval [i, j] that contains all of the operations where v is live. That is, i
is less than or equal to the ordinal number of the first operation where v is
live and j is greater than or equal to the ordinal number of the last operation
where v is live. As a result, the interference graph is an interval graph.

The interval [i, j] may contain operations and blocks that would not be in
the LRv that the global allocator would construct. Thus, it can overestimate
the precise live range.

To start, the allocator computes live information and builds a set of intervals
to represent the values. It sorts the intervals into increasing order by the
ordinal number of their first operations. At that point, it applies a version
of the local allocation algorithm from Section 13.3. Values are allocated to
free registers if possible; if no register is available, the allocator spills the
LR whose interval has the highest ordinal number for its last operation.



The linear scan algorithm approximates the behavior of the local allocator.
When the allocator needs to spill, it chooses the LR with the largest dis-
tance to the end of the interval (rather than distance to next use). It uses
a spill-everywhere heuristic. These changes undoubtedly affect allocation;
how they affect allocation is unclear.

The linear scan allocator can coalesce a copy that is both the end of one LR
and the start of another. This heuristic combines fewer LRs than the global
coloring allocator might coalesce—an unavoidable side effect of using an
implicit and approximate interference graph.

Live range splitting is a second attractive extension to linear scan. Breaking
long LRs into shorter LRs can reduce MAXLIVE and allow the allocator to
produce allocations with less spill code. To implement live range splitting,
the compiler writer would need heuristics to select which LRs the allocator
should split and where those splits should occur. Choosing the best set of
splits is, undoubtedly, a hard problem.

Linear scan allocators are an important tool for the compiler writer. Their
efficiency makes them attractive for just-in-time compilers (see Chapter 14)
and for small procedures where MAXLIVE < k. If they can allocate a pro-
cedure without spilling, then the allocation is, effectively, good enough.

Allocation Based on Hierarchical Coloring

The global allocator either assigns an LR to a register for its entire life, or it
spills that LR at each of its definitions and uses. The hierarchical allocator
takes ideas from live-range splitting and incorporates them into the way it
treats live ranges. These modifications give the allocator a degree of control
over the granularity and location of spilling.

In this scheme, the allocator imposes a hierarchical model on the nodes of
the CFG. In the model, a tile represents one or more CFG nodes and the flow
between them. Tiles are chosen to encapsulate loops. In the CFG shown in
the margin, tile T1 consists of {B1}. Tile T2 consists of {B2}. Tiles nest;
thus, tile T3 contains {B0, T1, T2, B3}. The tile tree in the margin captures
this relationship; T1 and T2 are siblings, as well as direct descendants of T3.

The hierarchical allocator performs control-flow analysis to discover loops
and group blocks into tiles. To provide a concrete representation for the
nesting among the tiles, it builds a tile tree in which subtiles are children of
the tile that contains them.

Next, the hierarchical allocator performs a bottom-up walk over the tile tree.
At each tile, Ti, it builds an interference graph for the tile, performs coalesc-
ing, attempts to color the graph, and inserts spill code as needed. When it



finishes with Ti, the allocator constructs a summary tile to represent Ti dur-
ing the allocation of Ti’s parent. The summary tile takes on the LIVEIN and
LIVEOUT properties of the region that it represents, as well as the aggregate
details of allocation in the region—the number of allocated registers and
any PR preferences.

Once all the tiles have been individually colored, the allocator makes a top-
down pass over the tile tree to perform assignment—that is, to map the
allocation onto PRs. This pass follows the basic form of the global allocator,
but it pays particular attention to values that are live across a tile boundary.

The bottom-up allocation pass discovers LRs one tile at a time. This process
splits values that are live across tile boundaries; the allocator introduces
copy operations for those splits. The split points isolate spill decisions inside
a tile from register pressure outside a tile, which tends to drive spills to the
boundaries of high-pressure tiles.

Cross-tile connections between live ranges become copy operations. The al-
Of course, the allocator could run a postal-
location coalescing pass over the allocated
code.
locator uses a preferencing mechanism similar to biased coloring to remove
these copies where practical (see Section 13.5.1). The same mechanism lets
the allocator model requirements for a specific PR.

Experiments suggest that the hierarchical allocator, with its shorter live
ranges, produced slightly better allocations than a straightforward im-
plementation of the global coloring allocator. Those same measurements
showed that the allocator itself used more compile time than did the base-
line global coloring allocator. The extra overhead of repeated allocation
steps appears to overcome the asymptotic advantage of building smaller
graphs.

13.6 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

Because register allocation is an important part of a modern compiler, it has
received much attention in the literature. Strong techniques exist for both
local and global allocation. Because many of the underlying problems are

NP-hard, the solutions tend to be sensitive to small decisions, such as how
ties between identically ranked choices are broken.

Progress in register allocation has come from the use of paradigms that pro-
vide intellectual leverage on the problem. Thus, graph-coloring allocators
have been popular, not because register allocation is identical to graph col-
oring, but rather because coloring captures some of the critical aspects of
the global allocation problem. In fact, many of the improvements to col-
oring allocators have come from attacking the points where the coloring



paradigm does not accurately reflect the underlying problem, such as bet-
ter cost models and improved methods for live-range splitting. In effect,
these improvements have made the paradigm more closely fit the real prob-
lem.

CHAPTER NOTES

Register allocation dates to the earliest compilers. Backus reports that Best
invented the algorithm from Section 13.3 in the mid-1950s for the original
FORTRAN compiler [27,28]. Best’s algorithm has been rediscovered and
reused in many contexts [39,127,191,254]. It best-known incarnation is as
Belady’s offline page-replacement algorithm, MIN [39]. Horwitz [208] and
Kennedy [225] both describe the complications created by clean and dirty
values. Liberatore et al. suggest spilling clean values before dirty values as
a compromise [254].

The connection between graph coloring and storage-allocation problems
was suggested by Lavrov [250] in 1961; the Alpha project used coloring
to pack data into memory [151,152]. Schwartz describes early algorithms
by Ershov and by Cocke [320] that focus on using fewer colors and ignore
spilling. The first complete graph-coloring allocator was built by Chaitin et
al. for IBM’s PL.8 compiler [80–82].

The global allocator in Section 13.4 follows Chaitin’s plan with Briggs’
modifications [57,58,62]. It uses Chaitin’s definition of interference and
the algorithms for building the interference graph, for coalescing, and for
handling spills. Briggs added an SSA-based algorithm for live range con-
struction, an improved coloring heuristic, and several schemes for live-range
splitting [57].

The treatment of register classes derives from Smith, Ramsey, and Holloway
[331]. Chaitin, Nickerson, and Briggs all discuss achieving some of the
same goals by adding edges to the interference graph to model specific as-
signment constraints [60,82,284].

The notion of coloring disjoint subgraphs independently follows from
Smith, Ramsey, and Holloway. Earlier, Gupta, Soffa, and Steele suggested
partitioning the graph into independent graphs using clique separators [184]
and Harvey proposed splitting it between general purpose and floating-point
registers [111].

Many improvements to the basic Chaitin-Briggs scheme have appeared
in the literature and in practice. These include stronger coalescing meth-
ods [168,289], better methods for spilling [40,41], register scavenging [193],
rematerialization of simple values [61], and live-range splitting [107,116,


Exercises
709

244]. Register promotion has been proposed as a preallocation transformation
that rewrites the code to increase the set of values that can be kept in a
register [73,77,258,261,315]. DasGupta proposed a precise incremental up-
date for coalescing and spilling, as well as a faster but somewhat lossy
update [124]. Harvey looked at coloring spill locations to reduce spill mem-
ory requirements [193].

The SSA-based allocators developed from the independent work of several
authors [64,186,292]. Both Hack and Bouchez built on the original observa-
tion with in-depth treatments [53,185]. Linear scan allocation was proposed
by Poletto and Sarkar [296]. The hierarchical coloring scheme is due to
Koblenz and Callahan [75,106].

EXERCISES

1.
Apply the local allocation algorithm to the following ILOC basic block.
Section 13.3
Assume that rarp and ri are live on entry to the block and that the target
machine has four physical registers.

loadAI
rarp, 12 ⇒ ra
loadAI
rarp, 16 ⇒ rb
add
ri, ra
⇒ rc
sub
rb, ri
⇒ rd
mult
rc, rd
⇒ re
multI
rb, 2
⇒ rf
add
re, rf
⇒ rg
storeAI rg
⇒ rarp, 8

2.
Consider the control-flow graph shown in Fig. 13.12. Assume that read
returns a value from external media and that write transmits a value to
external media.

a.
Compute the LIVEIN and LIVEOUT sets for each block.

b.
Assuming three physical registers, apply the local allocation algo-
rithm to blocks B0, B1 and B3. If block b defines a name n and
n ∈ LIVEOUT(b), the allocator must store n back to memory so that
its value is available in subsequent blocks. Similarly, if block b uses
a name n before any local definition of n, it must load n’s value from
memory. Show the resulting code, including all loads and stores.

c.
Suggest a scheme that would allow some of the values in
LIVEOUT(B0) to remain in registers, avoiding their initial loads in
the successor blocks.



■ FIGURE 13.12 Control-Flow Graph for Exercise 2.

3.
The Build–Coalesce loop tends to dominate the running time of the global
allocator. One way to reduce this cost is to build an interference graph
for Coalesce that only includes LRs that are involved in one or more
copy operations.

a.
Sketch a method to build this reduced graph.

b.
Discuss the costs and benefits, assuming that graph construction
takes O(n2) time where n is the number of nodes in the graph.
Assume that coalescing reduces the number of live ranges.

4.
Consider the following interference graph:
Section 13.4

Assume that the target machine has three physical registers and that each
live range has an estimated spill cost of 10.

a.
Apply the allocation algorithm from Section 13.4 to the graph.
Which live ranges are spilled? Which are colored?


Exercises
711

b.
Does the choice of spill node make a difference?

c.
Chaitin’s allocator used a different approach to Simplify and Select
than does the allocator from Section 13.4. In his allocator, Simplify
removed nodes from the graph in the same way and in the same
order as in the global allocator. Simplify build a list of these node
that were removed with the spill heurisitic. At the end of Simplify,
if that “spill list” was nonempty, the allocator immediately called

Insert Spills to spill all the nodes on the list. It then restarted the
allocation process on this modified code.

What happens when you apply Chaitin’s algorithm to the example
interference graph? Does this algorithmic change produce the same
results or different results?

5.
After register allocation, examination of the code may discover some
stretches of the code where some registers are free. In the global color-
ing allocator, this occurs because of detailed shortcomings in the way
that live ranges are spilled.

a.
Explain how this situation can arise.

b.
How might the compiler discover if this situation occurs and where
it occurs?

c.
What might be done to use these unused registers, both within the
global framework and outside of it?

6.
When the global allocator discovers that no color is available for a live
range, LRi, it spills or splits that live range. As an alternative, it might
attempt to recolor one or more of LRi’s neighbors. Consider the case
where (LRi,LRj) ∈ I and (LRi,LRk) ∈ I, but (LRj,LRk) /∈ I. If LRj and

LRk have already been colored, and they have different colors, the allo-
cator might be able to recolor one of them to the other’s color, freeing a
color for LRi.

a.
Sketch an algorithm that discovers if a legal and productive recol-
oring exists for LRi.

b.
What is the impact of your technique on the asymptotic complexity
of the register allocator?

c.
If the allocator cannot recolor LRk to the same color as LRj be-
cause one of LRk’s neighbors has the same color as LRj, should the
allocator consider recursively recoloring LRk’s neighbors? Explain
your rationale.



7.
The description of the global allocator suggests inserting spill code for
every definition and use in the spilled live range.

If a given block has one or more free registers, spilling a live range
multiple times in that block is wasteful. Suggest an improvement to the
spill mechanism in the global allocator that avoids this problem.

8.
Consider a procedure that consists of a single basic block with 10,000
operations and maximum register pressure of k + 15.

a.
How does the spilling behavior of the local allocator compare with
that of the global allocator on such a block?

b.
Which allocator do you expect to produce less spill code?




