Chapter14

Runtime Optimization

ABSTRACT
Runtime optimization has become an important technique for the imple-
mentation of many programming languages. The move from ahead-of-time
compilation to runtime optimization lets the language runtime and its com-
pilers capitalize on facts that are not known until runtime. If these facts
enable specialization of the code, such as folding an invariant value, avoid-
ing type conversion code, or replacing a virtual function call with a direct
call, then the profit from use of runtime information can be substantial.

This chapter explores the major issues that arise in the design and imple-
mentation of a runtime optimizer. It describes the workings of a hot-trace
optimizer and a method-level optimizer; both are inspired by successful real
systems. The chapter lays out some of the tradeoffs that arise in the design
and implementation of these systems.

KEYWORDS
Runtime Compilation, Just-in-Time Compilation, Dynamic Optimization

14.1 INTRODUCTION

Many programming languages include features that make it difficult to pro-
Runtime optimization
code optimization applied at runtime
duce high-quality code at compile time. These features include late binding,
dynamic loading of both declarations and code (classes in JAVA), and vari-
ous kinds of polymorphism. A classic compiler, sometimes called an ahead-
of-time compiler (AOT), can generate code for these features. In many cases,
however, it does not have sufficient knowledge to optimize the code well.
Thus, the AOT compiler must emit the generic code that will work in any sit-
uation, rather than the tailored code that it might generate with more precise
information.

For some problems, the necessary information might be available at link
time, or at class-load time in JAVA. For others, the information may not be
known until runtime. In a language where such late-breaking information
can have a significant performance impact, the system can defer optimiza-
tion or translation until it has enough knowledge to produce efficient code.



Compiler writers have applied this strategy, runtime optimization or just-in-
time compilation (JIT), in a variety of contexts, ranging from early LISP
systems through modern scripting languages. It has been used to build
regular-expression search facilities and fast instruction-set emulators. This
chapter describes the technical challenges that arise in runtime optimization
and runtime translation, and shows how successful systems have addressed
some of those problems.

Just-in-time compilers are, undoubtedly, the most heavily used compilers
that the computer science community has built. Most web browsers include
JITs for the scripting languages used in web sites. Runtime systems for
languages such as JAVA routinely include a JIT that compiles the heavily
used code. Because these systems compile the code every time it runs, they
perform many more compilations than a traditional AOT compiler.

Conceptual Roadmap

Classic AOT compilers make all of their decisions based on the facts that
they can derive from the source text of the program. Such compilers can
generate highly efficient code for imperative languages with declarations.
However, some languages include features that make it impossible for the
compiler to know important facts until runtime. Such features include dy-
namic typing, some kinds of polymorphism, and an open class structure.

Runtime optimization involves a fundamental tradeoff between time spent
compiling and code quality. The runtime optimizer examines the program’s
state to derive more precise information; it then uses that knowledge to spe-
cialize the executable code. Thus, to be effective, the runtime optimizer must
derive useful information. It must improve runtime performance enough to
compensate for the added costs of optimization and code generation. The
compiler writer, therefore, has a strong incentive to use methods that are
efficient, effective, and broadly applicable.

A Few Words About Time

Runtime optimization adds a new layer of complexity to our reasoning
about time. These techniques intermix compile time with runtime and in-
cur compile-time costs every time a program executes.

At a conceptual level, the distinction between compile time and runtime
JIT time
We refer to the time when the runtime opti-
mizer or the just-in-time compiler is, itself,
executing as JIT time.

remains. The runtime optimizer plans runtime behavior and runtime data
structures, just as an AOT compiler would. It emits code to create and main-
tain the runtime environment. Thus, JIT-time activities are distinct from
runtime activities. All of the reasoning about time from earlier chapters is
relevant, even if the time frame when the activities occur has shifted.



To further complicate matters, some systems that use runtime optimization
A “segment” might be a block, a trace, a
method, or multiple procedures.
rely on an interpreter for their default execution mode. These systems inter-
pret code until they discover a segment of code that should be compiled. At
that point they compile and optimize the code; they then arrange for subse-
quent executions to use the compiled code for the segment. Such systems
intermix interpretation, JIT compilation, and execution of compiled code.

Overview

To implement efficiently features such as late binding of names to types or
classes, dynamic loading and linking of code, and polymorphism, compiler
writers have turned to runtime optimization. A runtime optimizer can in-
spect the running program’s state to discover information that was obscured
or unavailable before runtime.

By runtime, the system mostly knows what code is included in the exe-
Runtime compilation also provides nat-
ural mechanisms to deal with runtime
changes in the program’s source text (see
Section 14.5.4).

cutable. Late bound names have been resolved. Data structures have been
allocated, so their sizes are known. Objects have been instantiated, with full
class information. Using facts from the program’s runtime state, a compiler
can specialize the code in ways that are not available to an AOT compiler.

Runtime compilation has a long history. McCarthy’s early LISP systems
compiled native code for new functions at runtime. Thompson’s construc-
tion, which builds an NFA from a regular expression, was invented to
compile an RE into native code inside the search command for the QED
editor—one of the first well-known examples of a compiler that executed
at runtime. Subsequent systems used these techniques for purposes that
ranged from the implementation of dynamic object-oriented languages such
as SMALLTALK-80 through code emulation for portability. The rise of the
World Wide Web was, in part, predicated on widespread use of JAVA and
JAVASCRIPT, both of which rely on runtime compilation for efficiency.

Runtime optimization presents the compiler writer with a novel set of chal-
lenges and opportunities. Time spent in the compiler increases the overall
running time, so the JIT writer must balance JIT costs against expected
improvement. Techniques that shift compilation away from infrequently
executed, or cold, code and toward frequently executed, or hot, code can
magnify any gain from optimization.

We use the term JIT to cover all runtime optimizers, whether their input
is source code, as in McCarthy’s early LISP systems; some high-level nota-
tion, as in Thompson’s RE-to-native-code compiler; some intermediate form
as in JAVA systems; or even native code, as in Dynamo. The digressions
throughout this chapter will introduce some of these systems, to familiarize
the reader with the long history and varied applications of these ideas.



0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140

0

2

4

6

8

10

ILOC Input Size, Thousands of Operations

Seconds

No JIT

JIT

0
5
10
15

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

ILOC Input Size, Thousands of Operations

Seconds

No JIT

JIT

(a) Full Data Set
(b) Expanded View of Small Data Sets

■ FIGURE 14.1 Scalability of a JAVA Application.

Impact of JIT Compilation

JIT compilation can make a significant difference in the execution speed of
The data was gathered on OpenJDK version
1.8.0_292 running on an Intel ES2640 at
2.4GHz.

The input codes had uniform register pres-
sure of 20 values. The allocator was allotted
15 registers.

an application. As a concrete example, Fig. 14.1 shows the running times
of a JAVA implementation of the local register allocation algorithm from
Section 13.3. Panel (a) shows the running time of the allocator on a se-
ries of blocks with 1,000 lines, 2,000 lines, 4,000 lines, and so on up to
128,000 lines of ILOC code. The gray line with square data points shows
the running time with the JIT disabled; the black line with triangular data
points shows the running time with the JIT enabled. Panel (b) zooms in on
the startup behavior—that is, the smaller data sets.

The JIT makes a factor of six difference on the largest data set; it more than
These numbers are specific to this single
application. Your experience will vary.
compensates for the time spent in the JIT. Panel (a) shows the JIT’s contri-
bution to the code’s performance. Panel (b) shows that VM-code emulation
is actually faster on small data sets. Time spent in the JIT slows execution
in the early stages of runtime; after roughly one-half second, the speed ad-
vantage of the compiled code outweighs the costs incurred by the JIT.

Roadmap

JIT design involves fundamental tradeoffs between the amount of work per-
formed ahead of time, the amount of work performed in the JIT, and the
improvement that JIT compilation achieves. As languages, architectures,
and runtime techniques have changed, these tradeoffs have shifted. These
tradeoffs will continue to shift and evolve as the community’s experience
with building and deploying JITs grows. Our techniques and our under-
standing will almost certainly improve, but the fundamental tradeoff of
efficiency against effectiveness will remain.



This chapter provides a snapshot of the state of the field at the time of publi-
cation. Section 14.2 describes four major issues that play important roles
in shaping the structure of a JIT-enabled system. The next two sections
present high-level sketches for two JITs that sit at different points in the de-
sign space. Section 14.3 describes a hot-trace optimizer while Section 14.4
describes a hot-method optimizer; both designs are modeled after success-
ful systems. The Advanced Topics section explores several other issues that
arise in the design and construction of practical JIT-based systems.

14.2 BACKGROUND

Runtime optimization has emerged as a technology that lets the runtime
system adapt the executable code more closely to the context in which it ex-
ecutes. In particular, by deferring optimization until the compiler has more
complete knowledge about types, constant values, and runtime behavior
(e.g., profile information), a JIT compiler can eliminate some of the over-
head introduced by language features such as object-orientation, dynamic
typing, and late binding.

Success in runtime optimization, however, requires attention to both the
efficiency and the effectiveness of the JIT. The fundamental principle of
runtime optimization is

A runtime compiler must save more cycles than it uses.

If the runtime compiler fails to meet this constraint, then it actually slows
down the application’s execution.

This critical constraint shapes both the JIT and the runtime system with
which it interacts. It places a premium on efficiency in the compiler itself.
Because compile time now adds to running time, the JIT implementation’s
efficiency directly affects the application’s running time. Both the scope and
ambition of the JIT matter; both asymptotic complexity and actual runtime
overhead matter. Equally important, the scheme that chooses which code
segments to optimize has a direct impact on the total cost of running an
application.

This constraint also places a premium on the effectiveness of each algorithm
that the JIT employs. The compiler writer must focus on techniques that are
both widely applicable and routinely profitable. The JIT should apply those
techniques to regions where opportunities are likely and where those im-
provements pay off well. A successful JIT improves the code’s running time
often enough that the end users view time spent in the JIT as worthwhile.



REGULAR EXPRESSION SEARCH IN THE QED EDITOR
Ken Thompson built a regular-expression (RE) search facility into the QED
editor in the late 1960s. This search command was an early JIT compiler,
invoked under the user’s direction. When the user entered an RE, the editor
invoked the JIT to create native code for the IBM 7094. The editor then
invoked the native code to perform the search. After the search, it discarded
the code.

The JIT was a compiler. It first parsed the RE to check its syntax. Next, it
converted the RE to a postfix notation. Finally, it generated native code to
perform the search. The JIT’s code generator used the method now known
as Thompson’s construction to build, implicitly, an NFA (see Section 2.4.2).
The generated code simulated that NFA. It used search to avoid introducing
duplicate terms that would cause exponential growth in the runtime state.

The QED search command added a powerful capability to a text editor that
ran on a 0.35 MIP processor with 32 KB of RAM. This early use of JIT
technology created a responsive tool that ran in this extremely constrained
environment.

This situation differs from that which occurs in an AOT compiler. Compiler
writers assume that the code produced by an AOT compiler executes, on
average, many times per compilation. Thus, the cost of optimization is a
small concern. AOT compilers apply a variety of transformations that range
from broadly applicable methods such as value numbering to highly specific
ones such as strength reduction. They employ techniques that produce many
small improvements and others that produce a few large improvements. An
AOT compiler wins by accumulating the improvements from a suite of opti-
mizations, used at every applicable point in the code. The end user is largely
insulated from the cost of compilation and optimization.

To recap, the constraints in a JIT mean that the JIT writer must choose trans-
formations well, implement them carefully, and apply them to regions that
execute frequently. Fig. 14.1 demonstrates the improvement from JIT com-
pilation with the HotSpot Server Compiler. In that test, HotSpot produced
significant improvements for codes that ran for more than one-half of a sec-
ond. Careful attention to both costs and benefits allows this JIT to play a
critical role in JAVA’s runtime performance.

14.2.1 Execution Model

The choice of an execution model has a large impact on the shape of a
runtime optimization system. It affects the speed of baseline execution. It af-
fects the amount of compilation that the system must perform and, therefore,



the cumulative overhead of optimization. It also affects the complexity of
the implementation.

A runtime optimization system can be complex. It takes, as input, code for
some virtual machine (VM) code. The VM code might be code for an ab-
stract machine such as the JAVA VM (JVM) or the Smalltalk-80 VM. In
other systems, the VM code is native machine code. As output, the runtime
optimizer produces the results of program execution.

The runtime system can produce results by executing native code, by inter-
The difference between these modes is
largely transparent to the user.
preting VM code, or by JIT compiling VM code to native code and running
it. The relationship between the JIT, the code, and the rest of the runtime
system determines the mode of execution. Does the system execute, by de-
fault, native code or VM code? Either option has strengths and weaknesses.

■
native-code execution usually implies JIT compilation before execution,
unless the VM code is native code.

■
VM-code execution usually implies interpretation at some level. The
code is compact; it can be more abstract than native code.

Native-code execution is, almost always, faster than VM-code execution.
Native code relies on hardware to implement the fetch-decode-execute cy-
cle, while VM emulation implements those functions in software. Lower
cost per operation turns into a significant performance advantage for any
nontrivial execution.

On the other hand, VM-code systems may have lower startup costs, since
A VM-code system can defer scanning and
parsing a procedure until it is called. The
savings in startup time can be substantial.
the system does not need to compile anything before it starts to execute
the application. This leads to faster execution for short-running programs,
as shown in Fig. 14.1(b). For procedures that are short or rarely executed,
VM-code emulation may cost less than JIT compilation plus native-code
execution.

The introduction of a JIT to a VM-code system typically creates a mixed-
The Deutsch-Schiffman SMALLTALK-80
system used three formats for an AR.
It translated between formats based on
whether or not the code accessed the AR as
data.

mode platform that executes both VM code and native code. A mixed-mode
system may need to represent critical data structures, such as activation
records, in both the format specified for the VM and the format supported by
the native ISA. The dual representations may introduce translation between
VM-code structures and native-code structures; those translations, in turn,
will incur runtime costs.



ADAPTIVE FORTRAN
Adaptive Fortran was a runtime optimizer for FORTRAN IV built by Hansen as
part of the work for his 1974 dissertation. He used it to explore both the
practicality and the profitability of runtime optimization. Adaptive Fortran
introduced many ideas that are found in modern systems.

The system used a fast ahead-of-time compiler to produce an IR version of
the program; the IR was grouped into basic blocks. At runtime, the IR was
interpreted until block execution counts indicated that the block could
benefit from optimization. (The AOT compiler produced block-specific,
optimization-specific thresholds based on block length, nesting depth, and
the cost of the JIT optimization.)

Guided by the execution counts and thresholds, a supervisor invoked a JIT
to optimize blocks and their surrounding context. The use of multiple
block-specific thresholds led to an effect of progressive optimization—more
optimizations were applied to blocks that accounted for a larger share of the
running time.

One key optimization, which Hansen called fusion, aggregated together
multiple blocks to group loops and loop nests into segments. This strategy
allowed Adaptive Fortran to apply loop-based optimizations such as code
motion.

The alternative, native-code execution, distributes the costs in a different
way. Such a system must compile all VM code to native code, either in an

AOT compilation or at runtime. The AOT solution leads to fully general code
and, thus, a higher price for nonoptimized native execution. The JIT solution
leads to a system that performs more runtime compilation and incurs those
costs on each execution.

There is no single best solution to these design questions. Instead, the com-
piler writer must weigh carefully a variety of tradeoffs and must implement
the system with an eye toward both efficiency and effectiveness. Successful
systems have been built at several points in this design space.

14.2.2 Compilation Triggers

The runtime system must decide when and where to invoke the JIT. This
decision has a strong effect on overall performance because it governs how
often the JIT runs and where the JIT focuses its efforts.

Runtime optimizers use JIT compilation in different ways. If the system JIT
compiles all code, as happens in some native-code systems, then the trigger
may be as simple as “compile each procedure before its first call.” If, instead,



the system only compiles hot code, the trigger may require procedure-level
or block-level profile data. Native-code environments and mixed-mode en-
vironments may employ different mechanisms to gather that profile data.

In a native-code environment, the compiler writer must choose between (1) a
system that works from VM code and compiles that VM code to native code
before it executes, or (2) a system that works from AOT-compiled native
code and only invokes the JIT on frequently executed, or hot, code. The two
approaches lead to distinctly different challenges.

VM-Code Execution

In a mixed-mode environment, the system can begin execution immediately
and gather profile data to determine when to JIT compile code for native
execution. These systems tend to trigger compilation based on profile data
exceeding a preset threshold value above which the code is considered hot.
This approach helps the system avoid spending JIT cycles on code that has
little or no impact on performance.

Threshold values play a key role in determining overall runtime. Larger
threshold values decrease the number of JIT compilations. At the same time,
they increase the fraction of runtime spent in the VM-code emulator, which
is typically slower than native-code execution. Varying the threshold values
changes system behavior.

To obtain accurate profile data, a VM-code environment can instrument the
Backward branch
In this context, a backward branch or jump
targets an address smaller than the program
counter.

Loop-closing branches are usually back-
ward branches.

application’s branches and jumps. To limit the overhead of profile collec-
tion, these systems often limit the set of points where they collect data. For
example, blocks that are the target of a backward branch are good candi-
dates to profile because they are likely to be loop headers. Similarly, the
block that starts a procedure’s prolog code is an obvious candidate to pro-
file. The system can obtain call-site specific data by instrumenting precall
sequences. All of these metrics, and others, have been used in practical and
effective systems.

Native-Code Execution

If the system executes native code, it must compile each procedure before
that code can run. The system can trigger compilation at load time, either
in batch for the entire executable (Speed Doubler) or as modules are loaded
(early versions of the V8 system for JAVASCRIPT). Alternatively, the sys-
tem can trigger the compiler to translate each procedure the first time it
runs. To achieve that effect, the system can link a stub in place of any yet-
to-be-compiled procedure; the stub locates the VM code for the callee, JIT
compiles and links it, and reexecutes the call.



SPEED DOUBLER
Speed Doubler was a commercial product from Connectix in the 1990s. It
used load-time compilation to retarget legacy applications to a new ISA.
Apple had recently migrated its Macintosh line of computers from the
Motorola MC 68000 to the IBM POWER PC. Support for legacy applications
was provided by an emulator built into the MacOS.

Speed Doubler was a load-time JIT that translated MC 68000 applications
into native POWER PC code. By eliminating the emulation overhead, it
provided a substantial speedup. When installed, it was inserted between the
OS loader and the start of application execution. It did a quick translation,
then branched to the application’s startup code.

The initial version of Speed Doubler appeared to perform an instruction-by-
instruction translation, which provided enough improvement to justify the
product’s name. Subsequent versions provided better runtime performance;
we presume it was the result of better optimization and code generation.

Speed Doubler used native-code execution with a compile-on-load
discipline to provide a simple and transparent mechanism to improve
running times. Users perceived that JIT compilation cost significantly less
than the speedups that it achieved, so the product was successful.

Load-time strategies must JIT-compile every procedure, whether or not it
ever executes. Any delay from that initial compilation occurs as part of the
application’s startup. Compile-on-call shifts the cost of initial compilation
later in execution. It avoids compiling code that never runs, but it does com-
pile any code that runs, whether it is hot or cold.

If the system starts from code compiled by an AOT compiler, it can avoid
Decreasing time in the JIT directly reduces
elapsed execution time.
these startup compilations. The AOT compiler can insert the necessary code
to gather profile data. It might also annotate the code with information that
may help subsequent JIT compilations. A system that uses precompiled na-
tive code only needs to trigger the optimizer when it discovers that some
code fragment is hot—that is, the code consumes enough runtime to justify
the cost of JIT compiling it.

14.2.3 Granularity of Optimization

Runtime optimizers operate at different granularities. This decision, made
at design time, has a strong impact on overall effectiveness because it de-
termines the kinds of optimizations that the JIT can apply and the code size
of the fragments that the JIT optimizes. Two particular optimization scopes
have been used widely.



Hot Traces
A trace optimizer watches runtime branches and jumps to dis-
Trace (revisited)
A trace is an acyclic sequence of blocks. As
used in runtime optimization, a trace can
cross procedure-call boundaries.

cover hot traces. Once a trace’s execution count exceeds the preset hot
threshold, the system invokes the JIT to construct an optimized native-
code implementation of the trace.

Trace optimizers perform local or regional optimization on the hot trace,
followed by native-code generation including allocation and scheduling.
Because a runtime trace may include calls and returns, this “regional”
optimization can make improvements that would be considered interpro-
cedural in an AOT compiler.

Hot Methods
A method optimizer finds procedures that account for a sig-
nificant fraction of overall running time by monitoring various counters.
These counters include call counts embedded in the prolog code, loop
iteration counts collected before backward branches, and call-site spe-
cific data gathered in precall sequences. Once a method becomes hot, the
system uses a JIT to compile optimized native code for the method.

Because it works on the entire method, the optimizer can perform nonlo-
cal optimizations, such as code motion, regional instruction scheduling,
dead-code elimination, global redundancy elimination, or strength re-
duction. Some method optimizers also perform inline substitution. They
might pull inline the code for a frequently executed call in the hot method.
If most calls to a hot method come from one call site, the optimizer might
inline the callee into that caller.

The choice of granularity has a profound impact on both the cost of opti-
mizations and the opportunities that the optimizer discovers.

■
A trace optimizer might apply LVN to the entire trace to find redundancy,
Assume a trace that has one entry but might
have premature exits.
fold constants, and simplify identities. Most method optimizers use a
global redundancy algorithm, which is more expensive but should find
more opportunities for improvement.

■
A trace optimizer might use a fast local register allocator like the algo-
Linear scan achieves some of the benefits of
global allocation with lower cost than graph
coloring.
rithm from Section 13.3. By contrast, a method optimizer must deal with
control flow, so it needs a global register allocator such as the coloring
allocator or the linear scan allocator (see Sections 13.4 and 13.5.3).

Again, the tradeoff comes down to the cost of optimization against the total
runtime improvement.

14.2.4 Sources of Improvement

A JIT can discover facts that are not known before runtime and use those
facts to justify or inform optimization. These facts can include profile infor-
mation, object types, data structure sizes, loop bounds, constant values or



THE DEUTSCH-SCHIFFMAN SMALLTALK-80 SYSTEM
The Deutsch-Schiffman implementation of Smalltalk-80 used JIT
compilation to create a native-code environment on a system with a
Motorola MC 68000-series processor. Smalltalk-80 was distributed as an
image for the Smalltalk-80 virtual machine.

This system only executed native-code. The method lookup and dispatch
mechanism invoked the JIT for any method that did not have a native-code
body—a compile-on-call discipline.

The system gained most of its speed improvement from replacing VM
emulation with native-code execution. It used a global method cache and
was the first system to use inline method caches. The authors were careful
about translating between VM structures and native-code structures,
particularly activation records. The result was a system that was astonishing
in its speed when compared to other contemporary Smalltalk-80
implementations on off-the-shelf hardware.

The system ran in a small-memory environment. (16MB of RAM was
considered large at the time.) Because native code was larger than VM code
by a factor of two to five, the system managed code space carefully. When
the system needed to reclaim code space, it discarded native code rather
than paging it to disk. This strategy, sometimes called throw-away code
generation, was profitable because of the large performance differences
between VM emulation and native-code execution, and between JIT
compilation and paging to a remote disk (over 10 MBPS Ethernet).

types, and other system-specific facts. To the extent that these facts enable
optimization that cannot be done in an AOT compiler, they help to justify
runtime compilation.

In practice, runtime optimizers find improvement in a number of different
ways. Among those ways are:

■
Eliminate VM Overhead
If the JIT operates in a mixed-mode envi-
In the Deutsch-Schiffman system, native
code was fast enough to compensate for the
JIT costs.
ronment, the act of translation to native code decreases the emulation
overhead. The native code replaces software emulation with hardware
execution, which is almost always faster.

Some early JITs, such as Thompson’s JIT for regular expressions in the
QED editor, performed minimal optimization. Their benefits came, al-
most entirely, from elimination of VM overhead.

■
Improve Code Layout
A trace optimizer naturally achieves improve-
ments from code layout. As it creates a copy of the hot trace, the JIT
places the blocks in sequential execution order, with some of the bene-
fits ascribed to global code placement (see Section 8.6.2).



In the compiled copy of the hot trace, the JIT can make the on-trace path
Dynamo, in particular, benefited from lin-
earization of the traces.
use the fall-through path at each conditional branch. At the same time,
any end-of-block jumps in the trace become jumps to the next operation,
so the JIT can simply remove them.

■
Eliminate Redundancy
Most JITs perform redundancy elimination.
A trace optimizer can apply the LVN or SVN algorithms, which also
perform constant propagation and algebraic simplification. Both algo-
rithms have O(1) cost per operation.

A method optimizer can apply DVNT or a data-flow technique such
as lazy code motion or a global value-numbering algorithm to achieve
similar benefits. The costs of these algorithms vary, as do the specific
opportunities that they catch (see Sections 10.6 and 10.3.1).

■
Reduce Call Overhead
Inline substitution eliminates call overhead.
A runtime optimizer can use profile data to identify call sites that it
should inline. A trace optimizer can subsume a call or a return into a
trace. A method optimizer can inline call sites into a hot method. It can
also use profile data to decide whether or not to inline the hot method
into one or more of its callers.

■
Tailor Code to the System
Because the results of JIT compilation are
We do not know of a JIT that performs
model-specific optimization.

For machine-dependent problems such as
instruction scheduling, the benefits might
be significant.

ephemeral—they are discarded at the end of the execution—the JIT can
optimize the code for the specific processor model on which it will run.

The JIT might tailor a compute-bound loop to the available SIMD hard-
ware or the GPU. Its scheduler might benefit from model-specific facts
such as the number of functional units and their operation latencies.

■
Capitalize on Runtime Information
Programs often contain facts that
An AOT compiler might identify values that
can impact JIT optimization and include
methods that query those values.
cannot be known until runtime. Of particular interest are constant, or un-
changing, values. For example, loop bounds might be tied to the size of
a data structure read from external media—read once and never changed
during execution. The JIT can determine those values and use them to
improve the code. For example, it might move range-checks out of a
loop (see Section 7.3.3).

In languages with late binding, type and class information may be dif-
ficult or impossible to discern in an AOT compiler. The JIT can use
runtime knowledge about types and classes to tailor the compiled code
to the runtime reality. In particular, it might convert a generic method
dispatch to a class-specific call.

JIT compilation can impose subtle constraints on optimization. For exam-
ple, traditional AOT optimization often focuses on loops. Thus, techniques
such as unrolling, loop-invariant code motion, and strength reduction have
all proven important in the AOT model. Hot-trace optimizers that exclude
cyclic paths cannot easily duplicate those effects.



THE DYNAMO HOT-TRACE OPTIMIZER
The Dynamo system was a native-code, hot-trace optimizer for
Hewlett-Packard’s PA-8000 systems. The system’s fundamental premise was
that it could efficiently identify and improve frequently executed traces
while executing infrequently executed code in emulation.

To find hot traces, Dynamo counted the executions of blocks that were likely
start-of-trace candidates. When a block’s count crossed a preset threshold
(50), the JIT would build a trace and optimize it. Subsequent executions of
the trace ran the compiled code. The system maintained its own
software-managed cache of compiled traces.

Dynamo achieved improvements from local and superlocal optimization,
from improved code locality, from branch straightening, and from linking
traces into larger fragments. Its traces could cross procedure-call boundaries,
which allowed Dynamo to optimize interprocedural traces.

Dynamo showed that JIT compilation could be profitable, even in
competition with code optimized by an AOT compiler. Subsequent work by
others created a Dynamo-like system for the IA-32 ISA, called DynamoRIO.

Control-flow optimizations, such as unrolling or cloning, typically require a
control-flow graph. It can be difficult to reconstruct a CFG from assembly
code. If the code uses a jump-to-register operation (jump in ILOC), it may be
ILOC includes the tbl pseudooperation to
record and preserve this kind of knowledge.
difficult or impossible to know the actual target. In an IR version of the code,
such branch targets can be recorded and analyzed. Even with jump-to-label
operations (jumpI in ILOC), optimization may obfuscate the control-flow
to the point where it is difficult or impossible to reconstruct. For example,
Fig. 12.17 on page 656 shows a single-cycle, software-pipelined loop that
begins with five jump-to-label operations; reconstructing the original loop
from the CFG in Fig. 12.17(b) is a difficult problem.

14.2.5 Building a Runtime Optimizer

JIT construction is an exercise in engineering. It does not require new the-
ories or algorithms. Rather, it requires careful design that focuses on effi-
ciency and effectiveness, and implementation that focuses on minimizing
actual costs. The success of a JIT-based system will depend on the cumula-
tive impact of individual design decisions.

The rest of this chapter illustrates the kinds of tradeoffs that occur in a run-
time optimizer. It examines two specific use cases: a hot-trace optimizer, in
Section 14.3, and a hot-method optimizer, in Section 14.4. The hypothetical
hot-trace optimizer draws heavily from the design of the Dynamo system.



The hot-method optimizer takes its inspiration from the original HotSpot
Server Compiler and from the Deutsch-Schiffman SMALLTALK-80 system.
Finally, Section 14.5 builds on these discussions to examine some of the
more nuanced decisions that a JIT designer must make.

SECTION REVIEW
In JIT design, compiler writers must answer several critical questions. They
must choose an execution model; will the system run unoptimized code in
an emulator or as native code? They must choose a granularity for
compilation; typical choices are traces and whole procedures (or methods).
They must choose the compilation triggers that determine when the
system will optimize (and reoptimize) code. Finally, compiler writers must
understand what sources of improvement the JIT will target, and they must
choose optimizations that help with those particular issues.

Throughout the design and implementation process, the compiler writer
must weigh the tradeoffs between spending more time on JIT compilation
and the resulting reduction of time spent executing the code. Each of these
decisions can have a profound impact on the effectiveness of the overall
system and the running time of an application program.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In a system that executes native code by default, how might the system
create the profile data that it needs? How might the system provide
that data to the JIT?

2.
Eliminating the overhead of VM execution is, potentially, a major source
of improvement. In what situations might emulation be more efficient
than JIT compilation to native code?

14.3 HOT-TRACE OPTIMIZATION

In the classic execution model for compiled code, the processor reads oper-
ations and data directly from the address space of the running process. The
drawing labeled “Normal Execution” in the margin depicts this situation. (It
is a simplified version of Fig. 5.15.) The fetch-decode-execute cycle uses
the processor’s hardware.

Conceptually, a native-code hot-trace optimizer sits between the executing
process’ address space and the processor. It “monitors” execution until it
has “enough” context to determine that some portion of the code is hot and
should be optimized. At that point, it optimizes the code and ensures that



future executions of the optimized sequence run the optimized copy rather
than the original code. The margin drawing depicts that situation.

The hot-trace optimizer has a difficult task. It must find hot traces. It must
improve those traces enough to overcome the costs of finding and compiling
them. For each cycle spent in the JIT, it must recover one or more cycles
through optimization. In addition, if the process slows execution of the cold
code, the optimized compiled code must also make up that deficit.

This section presents the design of a hot-trace optimizer. The design follows
that of the Dynamo system built at Hewlett-Packard Research around the
year 2000. It serves as both an introduction to the issues that arise and a
concrete example to explore design tradeoffs.

Dynamo executed native code by emulation until it identified a hot trace.
The emulator ran all of the cold code, gathered profile information, and
identified the hot traces. Thus, emulated execution of the native code was
slower than simply running that code on the hardware. The premise behind
Dynamo was that improvement from optimizing hot traces could make up
for both the emulation overhead and the JIT compilation costs.

These design concepts raise several critical issues. How should the system
define a trace? How can it find the traces? How does it decide a trace is hot?
Where do optimized traces live? How does emulated cold code link to the
hot code and vice versa?

Trace-Entry Blocks

In Dynamo, trace profiling, trace identification, and linking hot and cold
code all depend on the notion of a trace-entry block. Each trace starts with
an entry block. A trace-entry block meets one of two simple criteria. Either
it is the target of a backward branch or jump, or it is the target of an exit
from an existing compiled trace.

The first criterion selects blocks that are likely to be loop-header blocks.
These blocks can be identified with an address comparison; if the target
address is numerically smaller than the current program counter (PC), the
target address designates a trace-entry block.

The second criterion selects blocks that may represent alternate paths
through a loop. Any side exit from a trace becomes a trace-entry block.
The JIT identifies these blocks as it compiles a hot trace.

To identify and profile traces, the trace optimizer finds trace-entry blocks
and counts the number of times that they execute. Limiting the number of
profiled blocks helps keep overhead low. As the optimizer discovers entry



■ FIGURE 14.2 Conceptual Structure of a Hot-Trace Optimizer.

blocks, it enters them into a table—the entry table. The table contains an ex-
ecution count and a code pointer for each block. It is a critical data structure
in the hot-trace optimizer.

14.3.1 Flow of Execution

Fig. 14.2(a) presents a high-level algorithm for the trace optimizer. The
combination of the trace-entry table and the trace cache encapsulates the
system’s current state. The algorithm determines how to execute a block
based on the presence or absence of that block in the entry table and the
values of its execution counter and its code pointer.

Blocks run in emulation until they become part of a compiled hot trace. At
that point, further executions of the compiled trace run the block as part of
the optimized code. If control enters the block from another off-trace path,
the block executes in emulation using the original code.

The critical set of decisions occurs when the emulator encounters a taken
branch or a jump. (A jump is always taken.) At that point, the emulator
looks for the target address in the trace entry table.

■
If the target address is not in the table and that address is numerically
The smaller target address means that this
branch or jump is a backward branch.
smaller than the current PC, the system classifies the target address as
a trace entry block. It creates an entry in the table and initializes the



entry’s execution counter to one. It then sets the emulator’s PC to the
target address and continues emulation with the target block.

■
If, instead, the target address already has a table entry and that entry

The compiled trace is stored in the trace
cache.

has a valid code pointer, the emulator transfers control to the compiled
code fragment. Depending on the emulator’s implementation, discussed
below, this transfer may require some brief setup code, similar to the
precall sequence in a classic procedure linkage.

Each exit path from the compiled trace either links to another compiled
Section 14.3.2 discusses how the compiler
can link compiled traces together.
trace or ends with a short stub that sets the emulator’s PC to the address
of the next block and jumps directly back to the emulator—to label L1
in Fig. 14.2(a).

■
If the target address is in the table but has not yet been compiled, the sys-
tem increments the target address’ execution counter and tests it against
the hot threshold. If the counter is less than or equal to the threshold, the
system executes the target block by emulation. When the target address’
execution counter crosses the threshold, the system builds an IR image
of the hot trace, executes and compiles that trace, stores the code into
the trace cache, and stores its code pointer into the appropriate slot in
the trace entry table.

On exit from the compiled trace, execution continues with the next
block. Either the code links directly to another compiled trace or it uses
a path-specific exit stub to start emulation with the next block.

The algorithm in Fig. 14.2(a) shows the block-by-block emulation, inter-
spersed with execution of optimized traces. The emulator jumps into opti-
mized code; optimized traces exit with code that sets the emulator’s PC and
jumps back to the emulator. The rest of this section explores the details in
more depth.

Emulation

Following Dynamo, the trace optimizer executes cold code by emulation.
The JIT-writer could implement the emulator as a full-fledged interpreter
with a software fetch-decode-execute loop. That approach would require a
Values that live in memory can use the
same locations in both execution modes.
simulated set of registers and code to transfer register values between sim-
ulated registers and physical registers on the transitions between emulated
and compiled code. This transitional code might resemble parts of a stan-
dard linkage sequence.

As an alternative, the system could “emulate” execution by running the orig-
inal compiled code for the block and trapping execution on a taken branch
or jump. If hardware support for that trap is not available, the system can
store the original operation and replace it with an illegal instruction—a trick
used in debuggers since the 1960s.



When the PC reaches the end of the block, the illegal instruction traps. The
trap handler then follows the algorithm from Fig. 14.2(a), using the stored
operation to determine the target address. In this approach, individual blocks
execute from native code, which may be faster than a software fetch-decode-
execute loop.

Building the Trace

When a trace-entry block counter exceeds the hot threshold, the system in-
The optimizer leaves the original code
intact and in-place so that other paths, such
as side entries into the trace, can still use
those blocks in emulation.

vokes the optimizer with the address of the entry block. The optimizer must
then build a copy of the trace, optimize that copy, and enter the optimized
fragment into the trace cache.

While the system knows that the entry block has run more than threshold
times, it does not actually know which path or paths those executions took.
Dynamo assumes that the current execution will follow the hot path. Thus,
the optimizer starts with the entry block and executes the code in emulation
until it reaches the end of the trace—a taken backward branch or a transfer
to the entry of a compiled trace. Again, comparisons of runtime addresses
identify these conditions.

As the optimizer executes the code, it copies each block into a buffer. At
each taken branch or jump, it checks for the trace-ending conditions. An
untaken branch denotes a side exit from the trace, so the optimizer records
the target address so that it can link the side exit to the appropriate trace
or exit stub. When it reaches the end of the trace, the optimizer has both
executed the trace and built a linearized version of the code for the JIT to
optimize.

Consider the example shown in Fig. 14.3(a). When the emulator sees B1’s
counter cross the hot-threshold, it invokes the optimizer. The optimizer ex-
ecutes B1 and copies each of its operations into the buffer. The next branch
takes control to B2; the emulator executes B2 and adds it to the buffer. Next,
control goes to B5 followed by B6. The branch at the end of B6 goes back to
B1, terminating the trace. At this point, the buffer contains B1, B2, B5, and
B6, as shown in panel (b).

The drawing assumes that each of the side exits leads to cold code. Thus,
the JIT builds a stub to handle each side exit and the end-of-trace exit. The
stub labeled B *
i sets the emulator’s PC to the start of block Bi and jumps
to the emulator. The stub also provides a location where the optimizer can
insert any code needed to interface the compiled code with the emulated
code. Panel (b) shows stubs for B3, B4, and B7.

The optimizer builds the trace based on the dynamic behavior of the exe-
cuting code, which can produce complex effects. For example, a trace can



■ FIGURE 14.3 Building a Trace.

extend through a procedure call and, with a simple callee, through a return.
Because call and return are implemented with jumps rather than branches,
they will not trigger the criteria for an exit block.

Optimizing the Trace

Once the optimizer has constructed a copy of the trace, it makes one or more
passes over the trace to analyze and optimize the code. If the initial pass is a
backward pass, the optimizer can collect LIVE information and other useful
facts. From an optimization perspective, the trace resembles a single path
through an extended basic block (see Section 8.5). In the example trace, an
operation in B6 can rely on facts derived from any of its predecessors, as
they all must execute before control can reach this copy of B6.

The mere act of trace construction should lead to some improvements in
the code. The compiler can eliminate any on-trace jumps. For each early
exit, the optimizer should make the on-trace path be the fall-through path.
This linearization of the code should provide a minor performance improve-
ment by eliminating some branch and jump latencies and by improving
instruction-cache locality.

The compiler writer must choose the optimizations that the JIT will apply to
the trace. Value numbering is an obvious choice; it eliminates redundancies,
folds constants, and simplifies algebraic identities.

If the trace ends with a branch to its entry block, the optimizer can unroll
this path through the loop. In a loop with control flow, the result may be a
loop that is unrolled along some paths and not along others—a situation that
does not arise in a traditional AOT optimizer.



Early exits from the trace introduce complications. The same compensation-
code issues that arise in regional scheduling apply to code motion across
early exits (e.g., at the ends of B1 and B2). If optimization moves an opera-
tion across an exit, it may need to insert code into the stub for that exit.

The optimizer can detect some instances of dead or partially dead code.
Partially dead
An operation is partially dead at point p in
the code if it is live on some paths that start
at p and dead on others.

Consider an operation that defines ri. If ri is redefined before its next on-
trace use, then the original definition can be moved into the stubs for any
early exits between the original definition and the redefinition. If it is not
redefined but not used in the trace, it can be moved into the stubs for the
early exits and into the final block of the trace.

After optimization, the compiler should schedule operations and perform
register allocation. Again, the local versions of these transformations can be
applied, with compensation code at early exits.

Trace-Cache Size

The size of the trace cache can affect performance. Size affects multiple as-
pects of trace-cache behavior, from memory locality to the costs of lookups
and managing replacements. If the cache is too small, the JIT may discard
fragments that are still hot, leading to lost performance and subsequent re-
compilations. If the cache is too large, it may retain code that has gone
cold, hurting locality and raising lookup costs. Undoubtedly, compiler writ-
ers need to tune the trace-cache size to the specific system characteristics.

14.3.2 Linking Traces

One key to efficient execution is to recognize when other paths through the

CFG become hot and to optimize them in a way that works well with the
fragments already in the cache.

In the ongoing example, block B1 became hot and the optimizer built a
fragment for ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩, as shown in Fig. 14.4(a). The early exits to
B3 and B4 then make those blocks into trace-entry blocks. If B3 becomes
hot, the optimizer will build a trace for it. The only trace it can build is
⟨B3, B5, B6⟩, as shown in panel (b).

If the optimizer maintains a small amount of information about trace en-
tries and exits, it can link the two traces in panel (b) to create the code
shown in panel (c). It can rewrite the branch to B *
1 as a direct jump to B1.
Similarly, it can rewrite the branch to B *
3 as a direct jump to B3. The in-
terlinked traces then create fast execution paths for both ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩
and ⟨B1, B3, B5, B6⟩, as shown in panel (c). The exits to B4 and B7 still run
though their respective stubs to the interpreter.



■ FIGURE 14.4 Adding a Second Trace.

If during optimization of ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩, the JIT moved operations into
B *
3 , then the process of linking would need to either (1) preserve B *
3 on the
path from B1 to B3 or (2) prove that the operations in B *
3 are dead. With a
small amount of context, such as the set of registers defined before use in
the fragment, it could recognize dead compensation code in the stub.

Cross-linking in this way also addresses a weakness in the trace-construction
heuristic. The trace builder assumed that the (k + 1)st execution of B1 took
the hot path. Because the system only instruments trace header blocks, B1’s
execution count could have accrued from multiple paths between B1 and B6.
What happens if the (k + 1)st execution takes the least hot of those paths?

With trace linking, the (k + 1)st execution will build an optimized fragment.
If that execution does not follow the hot path, then one or more of the early
exits in the fragment will become hot; the optimizer will compile them and
link them into the trace, capturing the hot path or paths. The optimizer will
recover gracefully as it builds a linked set of traces.

Intermediate Entries to a Trace

In the example, when B1 became hot, the system built an optimized trace
for ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩. When B3 became hot, it optimized ⟨B3, B5, B6⟩.

The algorithm, as explained, builds a single trace for ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩ and ig-
nores the intermediate entry to the trace from the edge (B3, B5). The system
then executes the path ⟨B3, B5, B6⟩ by emulation until B3’s counter triggers
compilation of that path. This sequence of actions produces two copies of
the code for B5 and B6, along with the extra JIT-time to optimize them.

Another way to handle the edge (B3, B5) would be to construct an inter-
mediate entry into the trace ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩. The trace-building algorithm,
as explained, ignores these intermediate entry points, which simplifies



record-keeping. If the emulator knew that B5 was an intermediate entry
point, it could split the trace on entry to B5. It would build an optimized
trace for ⟨B1, B2⟩ and another for ⟨B5, B6⟩. It would link the expected-case
exit from ⟨B1, B2⟩ to the head of ⟨B5, B6⟩.

To implement trace splitting, the optimizer needs an efficient and effective
B4 has one predecessor while B5 has two.
mechanism to recognize an intermediate trace entry point—to distinguish,
in the example, between B4 and B5. The hot-trace optimizer, as described,
does not build an explicit representation of the CFG. One option might be
for the AOT compiler to annotate the VM code with this information.

Splitting ⟨B1, B2, B5, B6⟩ after B2 may produce less efficient code than com-
piling the unsplit trace. Splitting the trace avoids compiling ⟨B5, B6⟩ a sec-
ond time and storing the extra code in the code cache. It requires an extra
slot in the entry block table. This tradeoff appears to be unavoidable. The
best answer might well depend on the length of the common suffix of the
two paths, which may be difficult to discern when compiling the first trace.

SECTION REVIEW
A hot-trace optimizer identifies frequently executed traces in the running
code, optimizes them, and redirects future execution to the newly
optimized code. It assumes that frequent execution in the past predicts
frequent execution in the future and focuses the JIT’s effort on such “hot”
code. The acyclic nature of the traces leads to the use of local and
superlocal optimizations. Those methods are fast and can capture many of
the available opportunities.

The use of linked traces and interprocedural traces lets a hot-trace optimizer
achieve a kind of partial optimization that an ahead-of-time compiler would
not. The intent is to focus the JIT’s effort where it should have maximum
effect, and to limit its effort in regions where the expected impact is small.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
Once a trace entry block becomes hot, the optimizer chooses the rest
of the trace based on the entry-block’s next execution. Contrast this
strategy with the trace-discovery algorithm used in trace-scheduling.
How might the results of these two approaches differ?

2.
Suppose the trace optimizer fills its trace cache and must evict some
trace. What steps would be needed to revert a specific trace so that it
executes by VM-code emulation?



14.4 HOT-METHOD OPTIMIZATION

Method-level optimization presents a different set of challenges and trade-
offs than does trace-level optimization. To explore these issues, we will
first consider a hot-method optimizer embedded in a JAVA environment.
Our design is inspired by the original HotSpot Server Compiler (hereafter,
HotSpot). The design is a mixed-mode environment that runs cold methods
as JAVA bytecode and hot methods as native code. We finish this section
with a discussion of the differences in a native-code hot-method optimizer.

14.4.1 Hot-Methods in a Mixed-Mode Environment

Fig. 14.5 shows an abstract view of the JAVA virtual machine or JVM.
Classes and their associated methods are loaded into the environment by the
Class Loader. Once stored in the VM, methods execute on an emulator—the
figure’s “Bytecode Engine.” The JVM operates in a mixed-mode environ-
ment, with native-code implementations for many of the standard methods
in system libraries.

To add a method-level JIT, the compiler writer must add several features to
the JVM: the JIT itself, a software-managed cache for native-code method
bodies, and appropriate interfaces. Fig. 14.6 shows these modifications.

From an execution standpoint, the presence of a JIT brings several changes.
Cold code still executes via VM-code emulation; methods from native li-
braries still execute from native code. When the system decides that a
method is hot, it JIT-compiles the VM code into native code and stores the

■ FIGURE 14.5 The JAVA Runtime Environment.



■ FIGURE 14.6 Adding a JIT to the JAVA Runtime Environment.

new code in its native-code cache. Subsequent calls to that method run from
the native code, unless the system decides to revert the method to VM-code
emulation (see the discussion of deoptimization on page 742).

The compiler writer must make several key decisions. The system needs a
mechanism to decide which methods it will compile. The system needs
a strategy to gather profile information efficiently. The compiler writer must

Using native-code ARs may necessitate
translation between native-code and VM-
code formats.

The JAVA community often refers to ARs
as “stack frames.”
decide whether the native code operates on the VM-code or the native-code
versions of the various runtime structures, such as activation records. The
compiler writer must design and implement the JIT, which is just an effi-
cient and constrained compiler. Finally, the compiler writer must design and
implement a mechanism to revert a method to VM-code emulation when the
compiled method proves unsuitable. We will explore these issues in order.

Trigger for Compilation

Conceptually, the hot-method optimizer should compile a method when that
method consumes a significant fraction of the execution time. Finding a hot
method that meets this criterion is harder than finding a hot trace, because
the notion of a “significant fraction” of execution time is both imprecise and
unknowable until the program terminates.

Thus, hot-method optimizers fall back on counters and thresholds to esti-
Iteration can occur with either loops or
recursion. The mechanism should catch
either case.
mate a method’s activity. This approach relies on the implicit assumption
that a method that has consumed significant runtime will continue to con-
sume significant runtime in the future. Our design, following HotSpot, will
measure: (1) the number of times the method is called and (2) the number



THE HOTSPOT SERVER COMPILER
Around 2000, Sun Microsystems delivered a pair of JITs for its JAVA
environment: one intended for client-side execution and the other for
server-side execution. The original HotSpot Server Compiler employed more
expensive and extensive techniques than did the client-side JIT. The
HotSpot Server compiler was notable in that it used strong global
optimization techniques and fit them into the time and space constraints of
a JIT. The authors used an IR that explicitly represented both control flow
and data flow [92]. The IR, in turn, facilitated redundancy elimination,
constant propagation, and code motion. Sparsity in the IR helped make
these optimizations fast.

The JIT employed a novel global scheduling algorithm and a full coloring
allocator (see Section 13.4). To make the coloring allocator practical, the
authors developed a method to trim the interference graph that
significantly shrank the graph. The result was a state-of-the-art JIT that
employed algorithms once thought to be too expensive for use in a JIT.

of loop iterations that it executes. Neither metric perfectly captures the no-
tion that a method uses a large fraction of the running time. However, any
method that does consume a significant fraction of runtime will almost cer-
tainly have a large value in one of those two metrics.

Thus, the system should count both calls to a method and loop iterations
within a method. Strategically placed profile counters can capture each of
these conditions. For call counts, the system can insert a profile counter into
each method’s prolog code. For iteration counts, the system can insert a
The system can “sum” the counters by
using a single location for all the counters
in a method.
profile counter before each loop-closing branch. To trigger compilation, it
can either use separate thresholds for loops and invocations, or it can sum
the counters and use a single threshold.

HotSpot counted both calls and iterations and triggered a compilation when
the combined count exceeded a preset threshold of 10,000 events. This
threshold is much larger than the one used in Dynamo (50). It reflects the
more aggressive and expensive compilation in HotSpot.

Runtime Profile Data

To capture profile data, compiler writers can instrument either the VM code
for the application or the implementation of the VM-code engine.

Instrumented VM Code. The system can insert VM code into the method
to increment and test the profile counters. In this design, the profile over-
head executes as VM code. Either the AOT compiler or the Class Loader can



insert the instrumentation. Counter for calls can be placed in the method’s
prolog code, while counters for a specific call-site can be placed in the ap-
propriate precall sequence.

To profile loop iterations, the transformation can insert a counter into any
block that is the target of a backward branch or jump. An AOT strategy
might decrease the cost of instrumentation; for example, if the AOT com-
piler knows the number of iterations, it can increment the profile counter
once for the entire loop.

Instrumented Engine. The compiler writer can embed the profile support
directly into the implementtaion of the VM-code engine. In this scheme,
the emulator’s code for branches, jumps, and the call operation (e.g., the

JVM’s invokestatic or invokevirtual) can directly increment and test the
appropriate counters, which are stored at preplanned locations. Because the
profile code executes as native code, it should be faster than instrumenting
the VM code.

The emulator could adopt the address comparison strategy of the trace op-
By contrast, an AOT compiler would find
loop headers using dominators (see Sec-
tion 9.2.1).
timizer to identify loop header blocks. If the target address is numerically
smaller than the PC, the targeted block is a potential loop header. Alter-
natively, it could rely on the AOT compiler to provide an annotation that
identifies loop-header blocks.

Compiling the Hot Method

When profile data triggers the JIT to compile some method x, the JIT can
Tree-pattern matching techniques are a
good match to the constraints of a JIT (see
Section 11.4).
simply retrieve the VM code for x and compile it. The JIT resembles a full-
fledged compiler. It parses the VM code into an IR, applies one or more
passes of optimization to the IR, and generates native code—performing
instruction selection, scheduling, and register allocation. The JIT writes that
native code into the native-code cache (see Fig. 14.6). Finally, it updates the
tables or pointers that the system uses to invoke methods so that subsequent
calls map to the cached native code.

In a mixed-mode environment, the benefits of JIT compilation should be
greater than they are in a native-code environment because the cold code
executes more slowly. Thus, a hot-method optimizer in a mixed-mode envi-
ronment can afford to spend more time per method on optimization and code
generation. Hot-method optimizers have applied many of the classic scalar
optimizations, such as value numbering, constant propagation, dead-code
elimination, and code motion (see Chapters 8 and 10). Compiler writers
choose specific techniques for the combination of compile-time efficiency
and effectiveness at improving code.



GLOBAL VALUE NUMBERING
The literature on method-level JITs often mentions global value numbering as
one of the key optimizations that these JITs employ. The dutiful student will
find no consensus on the meaning of that term. Global value numbering has
been used to refer to a variety of distinct and different algorithms.

One approach extends the ideas from local value numbering to a global
scope, following the path taken in superlocal and dominator-based value
numbering (DVNT). These algorithms are more expensive than DVNT and the
cost-benefit tradeoff between DVNT and the global algorithm is not clear.

Another approach uses Hopcroft’s partitioning algorithm to find operations
that compute the same value, and then rewrites the code to reflect those
facts. The HotSpot Server compiler used this idea, which fit well with its
program dependence graph IR.

Finally, the JIT writer could work from the ideas in lazy code motion (LCM).
This approach would combine code motion and redundancy elimination.
Because LCM implementations solve multiple data-flow analysis problems,
the JIT writer would need to pay close attention to the cost of analysis.

Optimizations

Hot-method JITs apply local, regional, and global optimizations. Because
the JIT operates at runtime, the compiler writer can arrange for an optimiza-
tion to access the runtime state of the executing program to obtain runtime
values and use them in optimization.

Value Numbering
Method-level JITs typically apply some form of value
numbering. It might be a regional algorithm, such as DVNT, or it might
be one of a number of distinct global algorithms.

Value numbering is attractive to the JIT writer because these techniques
achieve multiple effects at a relatively low cost. Typically, these algo-
rithms perform some subset of redundancy elimination, code motion,
constant propagation, and algebraic simplification.

Specialization to Runtime Data
A JIT can have access to data about the
Inline method caches can provide site-
specific data about receiver types. The idea
can be extended to capture type information
on parameters, as well.

code’s behavior in the current execution, particularly values of variables,
type information, and profile data. Runtime type information lets the JIT
speculate; given that a value consistently had type t in the past, the JIT
assumes that it will have type t in the future.

Such speculation can take the form of a fast-path/slow-path implementa-
tion. Fig. 14.7 shows, conceptually, how such a scheme might work. The
code assumes that x and y are both 32-bit integers and tests for that case;



// x ← y + z

if actual_type(y) = 32_bit_integer and

actual_type(z) = 32_bit_integer then

x ← 32_bit_integer_add(y, z)

else

x ← generic_add(y, actual_type(y), z, actual_type(z));

■ FIGURE 14.7 Code with a Fast Path for the Expected Case.

if the test fails, it invokes the generic addition routine. If the slow path
executes too many times, the system might recompile the code with new
speculated types (see the discussion of “deoptimization” on page 742).

Inline Substitution
The JIT can inline calls, which lets it eliminate
method lookup overhead and call overhead. Inlining leads the JIT to tailor
the callee’s body to the environment at the call site. The JIT can use data
from inline method caches to specialize code based on call-site specific
type data. It can also inline call sites in the callee; it should have access
to profile data and method cache data for all of those calls.

The JIT can also look back to callers to assess the benefits of inlining a
When a JIT considers inline substitution, it
has access to all of the code for the applica-
tion. In an AOT compiler, that situation is
unlikely.

method into one or more of its callers. Again, profile data on the caller
and type information from the inline cache may help the JIT make good
decisions on when to inline.

Code Generation
Instruction selection, scheduling, and register alloca-
tion can each further improve the JIT-compiled code. Effective instruc-
tion selection makes good use of the ISA’s features, such as address
modes. Instruction scheduling takes advantage of instruction-level paral-
lelism and avoids hardware stalls and interlocks. Register allocation tries
to minimize expensive spill operations.

The challenge for the JIT writer is to implement these passes efficiently.
Tree-pattern matching techniques for selection combine locally optimal
code choice with extreme JIT-time efficiency. Both the scheduler and the
allocator can capitalize on sparsity to make global algorithms efficient
enough for JIT implementation. The HotSpot Server Compiler demon-
strated that efficient implementations can make these global techniques
not only acceptable but advantageous.

As with any JAVA system, a JIT should also try to eliminate null-pointer
checks, or move them to places where they execute less frequently. Escape
analysis can discover objects whose lifetimes are guaranteed to be contained
within the lifetime of some method. Such objects can be allocated in the
method’s AR rather than on the heap, with a corresponding decrease in al-
location and collection costs. Final and static methods can be inlined.



Deoptimization

If the JIT uses runtime information to optimize the code, it runs the risk that
Deoptimization
the JIT generates less optimized code due
to changes in runtime information
changes in that data may render the compiled code either badly optimized
or invalid. The JIT writer must plan for reasonable behavior in the event of
a failed type speculation. The system may decide to deoptimize the code.

Consider Fig. 14.7 again. If the system noticed, at some point, that most
To “notice,” the system would need to in-
strument the slow path.
executions of this operator executed the generic_add path, it might recompile
the code to speculate on another type, to speculate on multiple types, or
to not speculate at all. If the change in behavior is due to a phase-shift in
program behavior, reoptimization may help.

If, however, the statement has simply stopped showing consistency in the
types of x, y, or z, then repeated reoptimization may be the wrong answer.
Unless the compiled code executes enough to cover the cost of JIT compi-
lation, the recompilations will slow down execution.

The alternative is to deoptimize the code. Depending on the precise situation
and the depth of knowledge that the JIT has about temporal type locality, it
might use one of several strategies.

■
If the JIT knows that the actual type is one of a small number, it could
generate fast path code for each of those types.

■
If the JIT knows nothing except that the speculated type is often wrong,
it might generate unoptimized native code that just calls generic_add or
it might inline generic_add at the operation.

■
If the JIT has been called too often on this code due to changing patterns,
it might mark the code as not fit for JIT compilation, forcing the code to
execute in emulation.

A deoptimization strategy allows the JIT to speculate, but limits the down-
side risk of incorrect speculation.

14.4.2 Hot-Methods in a Native-Code Environment

Several issues change when the JIT writer attempts hot-method optimiza-
tion in a native-code environment. This section builds on insights from the
Deutsch-Schiffman SMALLTALK-80 implementation.

Initial Compilations

The native-code environment must ensure that each method is compiled to
native code before it runs. Many schemes will work, including a straight-
forward AOT compilation, load-time compilation of all methods, or JIT
compilation on the first invocation, which we will refer to as compile on



call. The first two options are easier to implement than the last one. Neither,
however, creates the opportunity to use runtime information during that ini-
tial compilation.

A compile-on-call system will first generate code for the program’s main
Using an indirect pointer to the code body
(a pointer to a pointer) may simplify the
implementation.
routine. At each call site, it inserts a stub that (1) locates the VM code for
the method; (2) invokes the JIT to produce native code for the method; and
(3) relinks the call site to point to the newly compiled native code. When
the execution first calls method m, it incurs a delay for the JIT to compile m
and then executes the native-code version of m. If runtime facts are known,
the first call to m can capitalize on them.

If the JIT compiler supports multiple levels of optimization, the compiler
writer must choose which level to use in these initial compiles. A lower level
of optimization should reduce the cost of the initial JIT compiles, at the cost
of slower execution. A higher level of optimization might increase the cost
of the initial JIT compiles, with the potential benefit of faster execution.

To manage this tradeoff, the system may use a low optimization level in
the initial compiles and recompile methods with a higher level of optimiza-
tion when they become hot. This approach, of course, requires data about
execution frequencies and type locality.

Gathering Profile Data

In a native-code environment, the system can gather profile information in
two ways: instrument the code to collect profile data at specific points in
the code, or shift to interrupt-driven techniques that discover where the ex-
ecutable spends its time.

Instrumented Code. The JIT compiler can instrument code as described
earlier for a mixed-mode hot-method optimizer. The JIT can insert code
into method prologs to count total calls to the method. It can obtain call-site
specific counts by adding code to precall sequences. It can insert code to
count loop iterations before loop-closing branches.

With instrumented code, JIT invocation proceeds in the same way that it
would in the mixed-mode environment. The JIT is invoked when execution
counts, typically call counts and loop iterations, pass some preset threshold.
For a loop-iteration count, the code to test the threshold and trigger compi-
lation should be inserted, as well.

To capture opportunities for type speculation and type-based code special-
ization, the JIT can arrange to record the type or class of specific values—
typically, parameters passed to the method or values involved at a call in the
method. The JIT should have access to that information.



Interrupt-Driven Profiles. Method-invocation counts tell the system how
often a method is called. Iteration counts tell the system how often a loop
body executes. Neither metric provides insight into what fraction of total
running time the instrumented code actually uses.

A native-code environment spends virtually all of its time executing ap-
The system must produce tables to map
an address into a specific location in the
original code.
plication code. Thus, it can apply another strategy to discover hot code:
interrupt-driven profiling. In this approach, the system periodically stops ex-
ecution with a timer-driven interrupt. It maps the program-counter address
at the time of the interrupt back to a specific method, and increments that
method’s counter. Comparing the method’s counter against the total num-
ber of interrupts provides an approximation to the fraction of execution time
spent in that method.

Because an interrupt-driven profile measures something subtly different
Some systems have used a combination
of instrumented code and interrupt-driven
profile data.
than instrumented code measures, the JIT writer should expect that an
interrupt-driven scheme will optimize different methods than an instru-
mented code scheme would.

The JIT still needs data, when possible, on runtime types to guide optimiza-
tion. While some such data might exist in inline method caches at call sites,
the system can only generate detailed information if the compiler adds type-
profiling code to the executable.

Deoptimization with Native Code

When a compiled method begins execution, it must determine if the precon-
ditions under which it was compiled (e.g., type or class speculation, constant
valued parameters, etc.) still hold. The prolog code for a method can test
any preconditions that the JIT assumed in its most recent compilation. In
a mixed-mode environment, the system could execute the VM code if the
precondition check fails; in a native-code environment, it must invoke the

JIT to recompile the code in a way that allows execution to proceed.

In a recompilation, the system should attempt to provide efficient execution
while avoiding situations where frequent recompilations negate the bene-
fits of JIT compilation. Any one of several deoptimization strategies might
make sense.

■
The JIT could simply recompile the code with the current best runtime
information. If the change in preconditions was caused by a phase shift
This strategy suggests a counter that limits
the number of “phase shifts” the JIT will
tolerate on a given method.
in program behavior, the current preconditions might hold for some time.

■
If the JIT supports multiple levels of optimization—especially with re-
gard to type speculation—the system could instruct the JIT to use a
lower level of speculation, which would produce more generic and less



tailored code. This approach tries to avoid the situation where the code
for some method oscillates between two or more optimization states.

■
An aggressive JIT could compile a new version of the code with the
current preconditions and insert a stub to choose among the variant code
bodies based on preconditions. This approach trades increased code size
for the possibility of better performance.

The best strategy will depend on how aggressively the JIT uses runtime in-
formation to justify optimizations and on the economics of JIT compilation.
If the JIT takes a small fraction of execution time, the JIT writer and the user
may be more tolerant of repeated compilations. By contrast, if it takes mul-
tiple invocations of a method to compensate for the cost of JIT compilation,
then repeated recompilations may be much less attractive than lowering the
level of speculation and optimization.

The Economics of JIT Compilation

The fundamental tradeoff for the JIT writer is the difference between cycles
spent in the JIT and cycles saved by the JIT. In a native-code environment,
the marginal improvement from the JIT may be lower, simply because the
unoptimized code runs more quickly than it would in a similar mixed-mode
environment.

This observation, in turn, should drive some of the decisions about which
optimizations to implement and how much recompilation to tolerate. The
JIT writer must balance costs, benefits, and policies to create a system that,
on balance, improves runtime performance.

SECTION REVIEW
A hot-method optimizer finds procedures that either execute frequently or
occupy a significant fraction of execution time. It optimizes each procedure
in light of the runtime facts that it can discern. Because a method optimizer
can encounter control flow, it can benefit from regional and global
optimizations, such as global value numbering or code motion; these
transformations have higher costs and, potentially, higher payoffs than the
local and superlocal techniques available to a trace optimizer.

The tradeoffs involved in a specific design depend on the execution
environment, the source-language features that produce inefficiency, and
the kinds of information gathered in the runtime environment. The design
of a hot-method optimizer requires an understanding of the language, the
system, the algorithms, and the behavior of the targeted applications.



REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.
In a mixed-mode environment, what kinds of data could the emulator
gather to facilitate specialization? How might it identify such opportu-
nities and collect the necessary data?

2.
Interrupt-driven profiles can work well in an environment where the
dominant fraction of execution occurs in native code. What are some
of the difficulties that the compiler writer might encounter using
interrupt-driven profiles in a mixed-mode environment?

14.5 ADVANCED TOPICS

The previous sections introduce the major issues that arise in the design of
a runtime optimizer. To build such a system, however, the compiler writer
must make myriad design decisions, most of which have an impact on the
effectiveness of the system. This section explores several major topics that
arise in the literature that surrounds JIT compilation. Each of them has a
practical impact on system design. Each of them can change the overall
efficacy of the system.

14.5.1 Levels of Optimization

AOT compilers typically offer the end user a choice among multiple levels
In practice, we know few developers who
consider compile time when selecting an
optimization level.
of optimization. This feature allows the user, in theory, to use stronger opti-
mization in places where it matters, while saving on compile time in places
where the additional optimization makes little difference.

A JIT-based system might provide multiple levels of optimization for sev-
eral reasons.

■
Because the elapsed time for application execution includes the JIT’s ex-
ecution, the JIT writer may decide to include in the standard compilation
only those optimizations that routinely produce improvements.

■
The system may find that a native-code fragment executes often enough
to justify more extensive analysis and optimization, which requires more

JIT time and saves more runtime.

■
If the JIT performs speculation based on runtime information, such as
types and classes, the JIT may later need to deoptimize the code, which
suggests a lower level of optimization.

For all these reasons, some runtime optimization systems have implemented
multiple levels of optimization.



If the system discovers a loop with a large iteration count, it might apply
loop-specific optimizations, such as unrolling, strength reduction, or code
motion. To ensure that those changes have immediate effect, it could per-
form on-stack replacement (see Section 14.5.2).

If the system finds that one method accounts for a significant fraction of
interrupt-based profile points, it might apply deeper analysis and more in-
tense optimization. For example, it might inline calls, perform analyses to
disambiguate types and classes, and reoptimize.

In either of these scenarios, a JIT with multiple levels of optimization needs
a clear set of policies to govern when and where it uses each level of opti-
mization. One key part of that strategy will be a mechanism to prevent the

JIT from trying to change the optimization level too often—driving up the

JIT costs without executing the code enough to amortize the costs.

14.5.2 On-Stack Replacement

A method-level JIT can encounter a situation in which one of the profile
counters crosses its threshold during an execution of a long-running method.
For example, consider a method with a triply nested loop that has iteration
counts of 100 at each level. With a threshold of 10,000, the counter on the
inner loop would trigger compilation after just one percent of the iterations.

The counter shows that the method is hot and should be optimized. If the
In effect, the system behaves as if a long-
running method has a higher threshold to
trigger compilation.
system waits until the next call to “install” the optimized code, it will run
the current code for the rest the current invocation. In the triply nested loop,
the code would run 99 percent of the iterations after the counter had crossed
the threshold for optimization.

To avoid this missed opportunity, the system could pause the execution, op-
timize and compile the code, and resume the execution with the improved
code. This approach capitalizes on the speed of the compiled code for the
majority of the loop iterations. To resume execution with the newly opti-
mized code, however, the system must map the runtime state of the paused
execution into the runtime state needed by the newly optimized code.

This approach, optimizing the procedure in a way that the current invocation
On-stack code replacement
A technique where the runtime system
pauses execution, JIT compiles the execut-
ing procedure, and resumes execution with
the newly compiled code

can continue to execute, is often called on-stack code replacement. The JIT
builds code that can, to the extent possible, execute in the current runtime
environment. When it cannot preserve the values, it must arrange to map
values from the current environment into the new environment.

The JIT can use its detailed knowledge of the old code to create the
new environment. It can generate a small stub to transform the current



environment—values in registers plus the current activation record—into
the environment need by the new code.

■
The stub may need to move some values. The storage map of the new
code may not match the storage map of the old code.

■
The stub may need to compute some values. Optimizations such as code
motion or operator strength reduction may create new values that did not
exist in the original code.

■
The stub may be able to discard some values. The state of the original
code may contain values that are dead or unused in the new code.

The stub runs once, before the first execution of the new code. At that point,
it can be discarded. If the JIT runs in a separate thread, as many do, the
system needs some handshaking between the JIT and the running code to
determine when it should switch to the new code.

The compiler writer has several ways to reduce the complexity of on-stack
replacement.

■
She can limit the number of points in the code where the system can
perform replacement. The start of a loop iteration is a natural location
to consider. Execution of the next iteration begins after compilation and
state mapping.

■
She can simplify the state-mapping problem by limiting the set of opti-
Techniques that create compensation code
or introduce new values can complicate the
mapping. Examples include code motion,
software pipelining, and inline substitution.

mizations that the JIT uses when compiling for on-stack replacement. In
particular, the JIT might avoid techniques that require significant work
to map the old environment into the new one.

The implementation of on-stack replacement ties in a fundamental way to
the interfaces between emulated and compiled codes and their runtime en-
vironments. The details will vary from system to system. This strategy has
the potential to provide significant improvement in the performance of long-
running methods.

14.5.3 Code Cache Management

Almost all JIT-based systems build and maintain a code cache—a dedicated,
To avoid confusion, we will refer to the
JIT’s cache as a code cache and to proces-
sor caches as hardware caches.
software-managed block of memory that holds JIT-compiled code. The JIT
writer must design policies and build mechanisms to manage the code cache.
Conceptually, code caches blend the problems and policies of a hardware
cache and a software-managed heap.

■
Hardware caches determine an object’s placement by an arithmetic map-
ping of virtual addresses to physical addresses. In a heap, software
searches for a block of free space that will hold the object. Code caches
are closer to the heap model for placement.



■
Hardware caches deal with fixed sized blocks. Heaps deal with requests
for arbitrarily sized blocks, but often round those requests to some com-
mon sizes. Code caches must accommodate blocks of native code of
different sizes.

■
Hardware caches use automatic, policy-based eviction schemes, typi-
cally informed by the pattern of prior use. Heaps typically run a collec-
tion phase to find blocks that are no longer live (see Section 6.6.2). Code
caches use policies and mechanisms similar to hardware caches.

Most JIT-based systems have a separate code cache for each process or each
thread. Some JIT writers have experimented with a global code cache, to
allow the reuse of JIT compiled code across processes. The primary benefit
from these designs appears to be a reduction in overall memory use; they
may provide better performance for a multitasked environment on a limited
memory system. When these systems find cross-process sharing, they also
avoid reinvoking the JIT on previously compiled code, which can reduce
overall runtimes.

The use of a limited-size code cache suggests that the standard virtual-
If virtual memory is fast enough, the system
can make the cache large and let the paging
algorithms manage the problem.
memory paging mechanism is either too slow or too coarse-grained to pro-
vide efficient support for the JIT-compiled code. Use of a limited-size cache
also implies that a code-cache eviction will discard the JIT-compiled code;
delinking it from the executing program and necessitating either emulation
or a recompilation if it is invoked in the future.

Replacement Algorithm

When the JIT compiles code, it must write that code into the code cache.
If the cache management software cannot find a block of unused memory
large enough to hold the code, it must evict another segment from the cache.

Replacement in the code cache differs from replacement in a hardware
A direct-mapped hardware cache has a set
size of one.
cache. A set-associative hardware cache determines the set to which the
new block maps and evicts one of the set’s blocks. The literature suggests
evicting the least recently used (LRU) block; many hardware caches use or
approximate LRU replacement.

Code cache management algorithms need to evict enough segments to create
room for the newly compiled code. In a hardware cache, eviction involves a
single fixed-size line. In a software-managed code cache, allocation occurs
at the granularity of the segment of compiled code (a trace, a method, or
multiple methods). This complicates both the policy and the implementation
of the replacement algorithm.

The cache management software should evict from the code cache one
or more segments that have not been used recently. The evicted segments



must free enough space to accommodate the new code without wasting “too
much” space. Choosing the LRU segment might be a good start, but the
potential need to evict multiple segments complicates that decision. If the
new code requires eviction of multiple segments, those segments must be
adjacent. Thus, implementing an LRU mechanism requires some additional
work.

The final constraint on replacement is that the algorithms must be fast; any
time spent in the replacement algorithms adds to the application’s running
time. Creative engineering is needed to minimize the cost of choosing a
block to evict and of maintaining the data structures to support that decision.

Fragmentation

Repeated allocation and replacement can fragment the space in a code
cache. Collected heaps address fragmentation with compaction; uncollected
heaps try to merge adjacent free blocks. Code caches lack the notion of a
free command; in general, it is unknowable whether some code fragment
will execute in the future, or when it will execute.

If the system executes in a virtual-memory environment, it can avoid some
of the complication of managing fragmentation by using more virtual ad-
dress space than allocated memory. As long as the code cache’s working set
remains within the intended cache size, the penalty for using more virtual
address space should be minimal.

14.5.4 Managing Changes to the Source Code

Some languages and systems allow runtime changes to an application at the
This feature is not new. Both APL in the
1960s and Smalltalk in the 1970s had fea-
tures to edit source code. Those systems,
however, were built on interpreters.

source-code level. Interpreted environments handle these changes relatively
easily. If the runtime environment includes JIT-compiled code, the system
needs a mechanism to recognize when a change invalidates one or more
native-code fragments, and to replace or recompile them.

The runtime system needs three mechanisms. It must recognize when
change occurs. It must identify the code and data that the change affects.
Finally, it must bring the current runtime state into agreement with the new
source code.

Recognize Change

The system must know when the underlying code has changed. The most
common way to capture changes is by restricting the mechanisms for mak-
ing a change. For example, JAVA code changes require the class loader; in
APL, code changes involved use of the quote-quad operator. The interface
that allows the change can alert the system.



Identify Scope of Change

The system must understand where the changes occur. If the text of a pro-
Similar problems arise with interprocedu-
ral optimization in an AOT compiler (see
Section 8.7.3).
cedure fee changes, then native code for fee is undoubtedly invalid. The
system needs a map from a procedure name to its native-code implemen-
tation. The more subtle issues arise when a change in fee affects other
procedures or methods.

If, for example, the JIT previously inlined fee into its caller foe, then the
change to fee also invalidates the prior compilation of foe. If fee is a good
target for inline substitution—say, its code size is smaller than the standard
linkage code—then a change to fee might trigger a cascade of recompila-
tions. The map from procedure names to code bodies becomes multivalued.

Interface changes to a method, such as changing the parameters, must invali-
date both the changed procedure and all of the procedures that call it. Details
in the precall and postreturn sequences are inferred from the interface; if it
changes, those sequences likely change, too.

Recompiling Changed Code

At a minimum, the system must ensure that future calls to a method execute
the most recent code. In a mixed-mode environment, it may suffice to delete
the JIT-compiled code for a changed method and revert to interpreting the
VM code. When the method becomes hot again, the system will compile it.
In a native-code environment, the system must arrange for the new code to
be compiled—either aggressively or at its next call.

To simplify recompilation, the JIT writer might add a level of indirection to
each call. The precall sequence then refers to a fixed location for the callee;
the JIT stores a pointer to the code body at that location. The extra indirec-
tion avoids the need to find all of the callers and update their code pointers.
To relink the method, the JIT simply overwrites the one code pointer.

In the case where the changed code invalidates compilations of other proce-
dures, the number of invalidations can rise, but the same basic mechanisms
should work.

Changes to Declarations

Runtime changes to the source code introduce a related problem—one that
arises in both interpreted and compiled implementations. If the source code
can change, then the definitions of data objects can change. Consider, for
example, a change that adds a new data member to a class. If that class
already has instantiated objects, those objects will lack the new data mem-
ber. The source language must define how to handle this situation, but in the



worst case, the system might need to find and reformat all of the instantiated
instances of the class—a potentially expensive proposition.

To simplify finding all of the objects in a class, the system might link them
together. Early SMALLTALK systems exhaustively searched memory to
find such objects; the limited memory on those systems made that approach
feasible.

14.6 SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVE

Just-in-time compilation systems make optimization and code generation
decisions at runtime. This approach can provide the JIT compiler with ac-
cess to more precise information about names, values, and bindings. That
knowledge, in turn, can help the JIT specialize the code to the actual run-
time environment.

JIT systems operate under strict time constraints. Well-designed and well-
built systems can provide consistent improvements. The speedups from the

JIT must compensate for the time spent gathering information, making de-
cisions, and compiling code. Thus, JIT writers need a broad perspective on
language implementation and a deep knowledge of compilation and opti-
mization techniques.

Despite the long history of runtime optimization, the field remains in flux.
For example, one of the most heavily used JITs, Google’s V8 JAVASCRIPT

JIT, was originally written as a native-code, compile-on-call system. Expe-
rience led to a reimplementation that uses a mixed-mode, hot-method ap-
proach. The primary justification for this change given in the literature was
to reduce code space and startup time; the hot-method version also avoided
parsing unused code. Changes in languages, runtime environments, and ex-
perience have driven work in runtime optimization over the last decade. We
anticipate that this field will continue to change for years to come.

CHAPTER NOTES

Runtime compilation has a long history. McCarthy included a runtime com-
pilation facility in his early LISP system so that it could provide efficient
execution of code that was constructed at runtime—a direct consequence of

LISP’s unified approach to code and data [266].

Thompson used an “edit-time” compilation of regular expressions into naive
code for the IBM 7094 to create a powerful textual search tool for his port of
the QED editor [345]; Section 2.4.2 describes the underlying construction.


Exercises
753

Hansen built his Adaptive Fortran system to explore the practicality and
profitability of runtime optimization [188]. It supported a subset of FOR-

TRAN IV and a small set of optimizations. He modeled the behavior of his
system against widely known FORTRAN compilers of the time. His disser-
tation includes significant discussion on how to estimate the benefits of an
optimization and how to trigger the runtime optimizations.

The Deutsch-Schiffman Smalltalk-80 implementation, built for an early Sun
Microsystems workstation, demonstrated the potential of runtime compila-
tion for improving dynamic languages [137]; contemporary implementa-
tions that relied on interpreting Smalltalk bytecode ran more slowly.

The HotSpot Server Compiler [288] and Dynamo [32] were widely rec-
ognized and influential systems. HotSpot influenced design decisions in

JIT-based systems for a decade or more. Dynamo inspired a generation of
work on problems that ranged from code-cache management to software
dynamic translation.

Most method-level optimizers apply some form of global value numbering.
These algorithms range from global extensions of the ideas in local value
numbering [59,167] through algorithms that build on Hopcroft’s DFA min-
imization algorithm [90,312] to implementations of lazy code motion (see
the notes for Chapter 10).

The time constraints that arise in JIT compilation have encouraged the use
of efficient algorithms. Tree-pattern matching instruction selectors can be
hyper-efficient: using five to ten compile-time operations per emitted opera-
tion [162,163,297]. Linear scan register allocation avoids the expensive part
of a full-fledged coloring allocator: building the interference graph [296]. In
an environment where many methods are small and do not require spill code,
linear scan works well. The HotSpot Server Compiler used interference
graph trimming to reduce the cost of a full-fledged coloring allocator [93].

EXERCISES

1.
Consider again the plot in Fig. 14.1 (JAVA scaling with and without the
Section 14.2

JIT). How might changes in the threshold for JIT compilation affect the
behavior of the JIT-enabled curve, particularly at the lower end of the
curve, shown in panel (b)?

2.
Write pseudocode for a backward pass over an acyclic trace that discov-
Section 14.3
ers dead and partially dead operations. Assume that the JIT has LIVE
information at each exit from the trace.

How might the JIT obtain LIVE information for the trace exits?



3.
One consideration in the design of a hot-trace optimizer is how to han-
dle intermediate entries into a trace. The design in Section 14.3 ignores
intermediate entries, with the effect that multiple copies of some blocks
are made.

As an alternative, the compiler writer could have the trace-building al-
gorithm split the trace at an intermediate entry. This strategy would
generate an optimized trace for the portion before the intermediate en-
try and an optimized trace for the portion after the intermediate entry. It
would then directly link the former part to the latter part.

a.
How might the trace-building algorithm recognize that a block is
an intermediate entry point?

b.
What kinds of JIT optimizations might have reduced effectiveness
as a result of splitting traces around intermediate entry points?

4.
If the trace optimizer has a bounded code cache and it fills that cache, it
may need to evict one or more traces.

a.
What complications do linked traces introduce?

b.
What approaches can the code-cache management algorithms take
to managing the eviction of linked traces?

5.
When a system with a hot-method optimizer discovers that some
Section 14.4
method has triggered too many recompilations, it may decide to de-
optimize the method.

The JIT could treat individual call sites differently, linking each call site
Assume, for the moment, that code-cache
space is not an issue.
to an appropriately optimized code body for the method.

a.
What information should the system gather to enable such call-site
specific optimization and deoptimization?

b.
What additional runtime data structures might the JIT need in order
to implement such call-site specific optimization?

c.
One obvious cost of such a scheme is space in the code cache. How
might the compiler writer limit the proliferation of variant code
bodies for a single method?

6.
Some hot-method JITs compile code in a separate thread, asyn-
chronously. What advantages might this offer to the end user? What
disadvantages might it create?

7.
Deoptimization must deal with the results of inline substitution. Sup-
pose the JIT has inlined fie into fee, and that it later decides that it
must deoptimize fee. What strategies can the JIT implement to simplify
deoptimization of a method that includes inlined code?


Exercises
755

8.
Ahead-of-time (AOT) compilers choose which procedures to inline
based on some combination of static analysis and profile data from a
prior run on “representative” data. By contrast, a JIT decides to inline a
procedure based almost entirely on runtime profile information.

a.
Suggest three heuristics that a hot-method JIT might use to deter-
mine whether or not to inline the callee at a specific call site.

b.
What kinds of data can the runtime system gather to help in the
decision of whether or not to inline a specific call site?

c.
Contrast your strategies, and the results you expect from them, with
the results you expect from an AOT compiler.


This page intentionally left blank




