AppendixB

Data Structures

B.1 INTRODUCTION

A compiler is the sum of its myriad parts. Thus, a successful compiler
requires attention to many details. This appendix explores some of the algo-
rithmic and implementation issues that arise in building a compiler. In most
cases, these details would distract from the relevant discussion in the body
of the text. We have gathered them together into this appendix, where they
can be considered as needed.

This appendix focuses on the engineering issues that arise in the design and
implementation of the infrastructure to support a compiler. The way that the
compiler writer resolves these issues has a large impact on both the speed
of the resulting compiler and the ease of extending and maintaining it.

In many applications, it makes sense for the programmer to rely on data-
structure implementations from standard libraries. The extraordinary stabil-
ity of JAVA and the increasing use of PYTHON have made this approach
both practical and widespread. However, when a routine executes suffi-
ciently often, the incremental improvement attained from custom-built data
structures can be significant. On the scale of a compiler such as GCC or
LLVM, the cumulative payoff may well justify the effort of implementing a
custom representation for a set, a graph, a map, or another data structure.

As one example of the issues that arise in compilation, consider the size of
the compiler’s own data structures. The compiler cannot know the size some
of those data structures until it has read the input; thus, the front end must
be designed to expand the size of its data structures gracefully in order to
accommodate large input files. As a corollary, however, subsequent passes
in the compiler should know the approximate sizes needed for most of their
internal data structures; the front end can record those sizes for the later
passes. If the front end needed 10,000 names in the IR program, the compiler
should not begin a later pass with a symbol table sized for 512 names. The
header of any external representation of the IR should include a specification
of the rough sizes of major data structures.

Similarly, the later passes of a compiler can assume that the IR program
presented to them was generated by the compiler. While they should detect
all errors, the error messages might be more terse than one would expect in

769


Data Structures

the front end. A common strategy is to build a validation pass that performs a
thorough check on the IR program and can be inserted between other passes
for debugging purposes, and to rely on less-strenuous error detection when
not debugging the compiler. However, the compiler writers should always
remember that they are the people most likely to look at the code between
The arrow in ILOC is an example of this
principle. It makes the flow of values
explicit and eliminates one source of confu-
sion in reading the ILOC code.
passes. Effort spent to make the external forms of the IR more readable often
rewards the very people who invested the time and effort in it.

As a final example, consider the implementation of a sparse graph. This
problem arises in optimization and in code generation; both the scheduler’s
dependence graph and the register allocator’s interference graph tend to be
sparse. The implementor might consider representing a sparse graph with a
hash table. While dependence graphs for local scheduling tend to be small
(limited by block size), interference graphs can grow large enough to make
space efficiency a concern.

The idea is simple. Each edge is a (source, sink) pair. Hashing the pairs
provides a quick membership test. Edge-specific storage can be created in
the hash-table entry for the edge’s pair. As long as the hash function is well-
behaved, this scheme produces a space-efficient representation with good
asymptotic time behavior.

However, the compiler writer must take care to use a hash function that
works well on the edges. If source and sink are small integers, the hash
function may not have that many bits of information to use. From experi-
ence [111], hash-based interference graph representations depend heavily
on the quality of the hash function.

B.2 REPRESENTING SETS

Many different problems in compilation are formulated in terms that involve
sets. They arise at many points in the text, including the subset construc-
tion (Chapter 2), the construction of the canonical collection of LR(1) items
(Chapter 3), data-flow analysis (Chapters 8 and 9), and worklists such as the
ready queue in list scheduling (Chapter 12). In each context, the compiler
writer must select an appropriate set representation. In many cases, the effi-
ciency of the algorithm depends on careful selection of a set representation
(see, for example, the IDoms-based algorithm in Section 9.5.2).

A fundamental difference between building a compiler and building other
kinds of systems software—such as an operating system—is that many
problems in compilation can be solved offline. For example, the local
register-allocation algorithm in Chapter 13 is better known as Belady’s MIN
algorithm for offline page replacement, which has long been used as a stan-
dard against which to judge the effectiveness of online page-replacement


Data Structures
771

algorithms. In the operating systems community, the algorithm is of only
academic interest because it is an offline algorithm. Since the operating sys-
tem cannot know what pages will be needed in the future, it cannot use an
offline algorithm. In a compiler, the offline algorithm is practical because the
compiler can look through the entire block before making any decisions.

The offline nature of compilation allows the compiler writer to use a broad
variety of set representations. Many representations for sets have been ex-
plored. In particular, offline computation often lets us restrict the members
of a set S to a fixed-size universe U (S ⊆ U). This, in turn, lets us use more
efficient set representations than are available in an online situation where
the size of U is discovered dynamically.

Common set operations include member, insert, delete, clear, choose-one,
cardinality, forall, copy, compare, union, intersect, difference, and complement.
A specific application typically uses only a small subset of these operations.
The cost of individual set operations depends on the particular representa-
tion chosen. In selecting an efficient representation for a particular applica-
tion, it is important to consider how frequently each type of operation will
be used. Other factors to consider include the memory requirements of the
set representation and the expected sparsity of S relative to U.

The rest of this section focuses on three set representations that compiler
writers often use: ordered linked lists, bit vectors, and sparse sets. The final
subsection briefly discusses the role of hashing in set implementation.

B.2.1 Representing Sets as Ordered Lists

In cases in which the size of each set is small, it sometimes makes sense
to use a simple linked-list representation. For a set S, this representation
consists of a linked list and a pointer to the first element in the list. Each
node in the list contains a representation for a single element of S and a
pointer to the next element of the list. The final node on the list has its
pointer set to a standard value indicating the end of the list. With a linked-
list representation, the implementation can impose an order on the elements
to create an ordered list. For example, an ordered linked list for the set S =
{i, j, k}, i < j < k might look, conceptually, as follows:

The elements are kept in ascending order. The size of S’s representation is
proportional to the number of elements in S, not the size of U. If |S| is much


Data Structures

Operation
Ordered Linked List
Bit Vector
Sparse Set

member
O(|S|)
O(1)
O(1)

insert
O(|S|)
O(1)
O(1)

delete
O(|S|)
O(1)
O(1)

clear
O(1)
O(|U|)
O(1)

choose-one
O(1)
O(|U|)
O(1)

cardinality
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(1)

forall
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

copy
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

compare
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

union
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

intersect
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

difference
O(|S|)
O(|U|)
O(|S|)

complement
—
O(|U|)
O(|U|)

■ FIGURE B.1 Asymptotic Time Complexities of Set Operations.

smaller than |U|, the savings from representing just the elements present in
S may more than offset the extra cost incurred for a pointer in each element.

The list representation is particularly flexible. Because nothing in the list
relies on either the size of U or the size of S, it can be used in situations in
which the compiler is discovering U or S or both. Such situations arise in the
front end, where the compiler acts before it has seen the entire input, and in
places where it translates one name space into another, as in the construction
of live ranges in a register allocator.

The table in Fig. B.1 shows the asymptotic complexities of common set op-
erations using this representation. Most of the ordered linked list operations
are O(|S|) because it is necessary to walk the linked lists to perform the op-
erations. If deallocation does not require walking the list to free the nodes
for individual elements, as in a collected system or an arena-based system,

clear takes constant time.

If the size of the universe is unknown but it can can grow reasonably large,
the compiler writer can decrease the space overhead from pointers and the
allocation overhead by creating nodes that hold multiple set elements. Each
node has space for k elements, along with a counter that holds the number
of occupied elements. Building a set of n elements then requires ⌈ n

k ⌉ allo-
cations, ⌈ n

k⌉ + 1 pointers, and ⌈ n

k⌉ + 1 counters, where a set implemented
with single-element nodes would take n allocations and n +1 pointers.


Data Structures
773

This scheme does have a cost. Insertion and deletion may need to move
more data than they would with single-element nodes. Their asymptotic
complexity, however, remains O(|S|). A clever implementation can limit
such shuffling to k elements on any insert or delete, at the cost of wasting
some space.

The IDoms array used in the fast dominance computation (see Section 9.5.2)
is a clever application of the list representation of sets to a special case. In
particular, the compiler knows the size of the universe and the number of
sets. The compiler also knows that, using ordered sets, the sets have the
property that if e ∈ S1 and e ∈ S2 then every element after e in S1 is also
in S2. Thus, the elements starting with e can be shared. By using an array
representation, the element names can be used as pointers, too. Thus, a sin-
gle array of n elements can represent n sparse sets. It also leads to a fast
intersection operator for those sets.

B.2.2 Representing Sets as Bit Vectors

Compiler writers often use bit vectors to represent sets, particularly those
used in data-flow analysis (see Sections 8.6.1 and 9.2). For a bounded uni-
verse U, a set S ⊆ U can be represented with a bit vector of length |U|,
called the characteristic vector for S. For each i ∈ U, 0 ≤ i < |U|; if i ∈ S,
the ith element of the characteristic vector equals one. Otherwise, the ith
element is zero. For example, the characteristic vector for the set S ⊆ U,
where S = {i, j ,k}, i < j < k is as follows:

0
i − 1
i
i + 1
j − 1
j
j + 1
k − 1
k
k + 1
|U| − 1

0
···
0
1
0
···
0
1
0
···
0
1
0
···
0

The bit-vector representation always allocates enough space to represent all
elements in U; thus, this representation can be used only in an application
where U is known—an offline application.

The table in Fig. B.1 lists the asymptotic complexities of common set opera-
tions with this representation. Although many of the operations are O(|U|),
they can still be efficient if U is small. A single word holds many elements;
the representation gains a constant-factor improvement over representations
that need one word per element. Thus, for example, with 64-bit words, any
universe of 64 or fewer elements has a single-word representation.

The compactness of the representation carries over into the speed of op-
erations. With single-word sets, many of the set operations become single
machine instructions; for example, union becomes a logical-or operation and

intersection becomes a logical-and operation. Even if the sets take multiple


Data Structures

words to represent, the number of machine instructions required to perform
many of the set operations is reduced by a factor of the machine’s word size.

B.2.3 Representing Sparse Sets

For a fixed universe U and a set S ⊆ U, S is a sparse set if |S| is much smaller
than |U|. Some of the sets encountered in compilation are sparse. For ex-
ample, the LIVEOUT sets used in register allocation are typically sparse.
Compiler writers often use bit vectors to represent such sets, due to their
efficiency in time and space. With enough sparsity, however, more time-
efficient representations are possible, especially in situations in which a
large percentage of the operations can be supported in either O(1) or O(|S|)
time. By contrast, bit vector sets take either O(1) or O(|U|) time on these
operations. If |S| is smaller than |U| by a factor greater than the word size,
then bit vectors may be the less efficient choice.

One sparse-set representation that has these properties uses two vectors of
length |U| and a scalar to represent the set. The first vector, sparse, holds
a sparse representation of the set; the other vector, dense, holds a dense
representation of the set. The scalar, next, holds the index of the location in
dense where the next new element of the set can be inserted. Of course, next
also holds the set’s cardinality.

Neither vector needs to be initialized when a sparse set is created; set mem-
bership tests ensure the validity of each entry as it is accessed. The clear
operation simply sets next back to zero, its initial value. To add a new ele-
ment i ∈ U to S, the code (1) stores i in the next location in dense, (2) stores
the value of next in the ith location in sparse, and (3) increments next so that
it is the index of the next location where an element can be inserted in dense.

If we began with an empty sparse set S and added elements j, i, and k, in
order, where i < j < k, the set would reach the following state:

Note that the sparse-set representation requires enough space to represent
all of U. Thus, it can be used only in offline situations in which the compiler
knows the size of U.


Data Structures
775

The sparse set has a concise membership test. The valid entries for an ele-
ment i in sparse and dense must point to each other, so element i is in the set
if and only if:

0 ≤ sparse[i] < next and
dense[sparse[i]] = i

The table in Fig. B.1 lists the asymptotic complexities of common set op-
erations on this representation. Because this scheme includes both a sparse
and a dense representation of the set, it achieves some of the advantages of
each. Individual elements of the set can be accessed in O(1) time through
sparse, while set operations that must traverse the set can use dense to obtain
O(|S|) complexity.

Both space and time complexities should be considered when choosing
between bit-vector and sparse-set representations. The sparse-set represen-
tation requires two vectors of length |U| and a scalar. By contrast, a bit-
vector representation requires a single bit-vector of length |U|. As shown
in Fig. B.1, the sparse-set representation dominates the bit-vector repre-
sentation in terms of asymptotic time complexity. However, because of the
efficient implementations possible for bit-vector set operations, bit vectors
are preferred in situations where S is not sparse. When choosing between
the two representations, it is important to consider both the sparsity of the
represented set and the relative frequency of the set operations employed.

B.2.4 The Role of Hash Tables

Mapping textual names, such as source-code names, compiler-generated
For a name x, its internal name would be
the position of the bit that represents a
name x in a bit vector set or the index for x
in a sparse set’s dense vector.

temporary names, or virtual registers, into the internal names used in a set
implementation is a critical aspect of set implementation. One effective way
to create this map is with a hash table. Using the external name as the key
and the internal name as the value creates an expected-case O(1) map.

B.3 IR IMPLEMENTATION

A compiler’s IR is its central data structure. The IR, along with associ-
ated ancillary data structures, represents the program under translation. The
compiler repeatedly traverses those structures, analyzes their contents, and
rewrites those contents. Thus, the implementation of the IR plays an impor-
tant role in the overall efficiency of the compiler.

Chapter 4 presented a broad overview of the kinds of intermediate represen-
tations that compilers use. This section focuses on details in the implemen-
When compiler writers gather, they often
exchange stories about what D. R. Chase
has called “stupid compiler tricks.”
tation of an IR. Some of the content is common sense; some of it draws on
the experience of the authors and their friends in the compiler construction


Data Structures

community. Sections B.3.1 and B.3.2 address concerns in the implementa-
tion of graphical and linear IRs, respectively.

The compiler writer should pay attention to the overall size of IR programs
and to the ease with which the compiler can traverse the IR program. Both
concerns affect performance. Using more memory than necessary intro-
duces additional costs—particularly in locality and in garbage collection.
In the extreme, it can limit the size of input programs that the compiler can
reasonably handle. An IR that is hard to traverse introduces its own ineffi-
ciencies.

B.3.1 Graphical Intermediate Representations

Compilers use a variety of graphical IRs (see Section 4.3). Tailoring a
graph’s implementation to the compiler’s specific needs can improve both
its usability and its space efficiency. This subsection describes some of the
issues that arise in tree and graph implementation.

Representing Trees

The obvious representation for a tree, in most languages, is as a collection
of nodes connected by pointers. A typical implementation allocates nodes
on demand, as it builds the tree. The compiler writer may choose to use mul-
tiple sizes of nodes, perhaps with different numbers of children or different
data fields. Alternatively, the tree can be built from a single kind of node,
allocated to fit the largest possible node.

An alternative representation might use an array of node structures. Links
between nodes can be either array indices or pointers (providing the lan-
guage has an address-of operator). This design forces a one-size-fits-all
node, but is otherwise similar to the pointer-based implementation.

Each of these schemes has strengths and weaknesses. The tradeoffs must be
evaluated in the context of a given project and its implementation language.

■
A node and pointer scheme handles arbitrarily large trees in a natural
way. An array of node structures scheme requires code to expand the
array when the tree grows beyond its initial size.

■
A node and pointer scheme usually requires an allocation for each node.
Arena-based allocation can reduce the cost of deallocation (see the di-
gression on page 312).

■
The node and pointer scheme has locality that depends entirely on the
runtime behavior of the underlying allocator. The array of node struc-
tures scheme uses a large block of consecutive memory locations, which
keeps successive nodes from interfering with each other in the cache.


Data Structures
777

DECISIONS AFFECTING THE SIZE OF THE IR
The compiler writer should pay attention to the total size of the IR form of a
program. Larger IRs often lead to slower compilers; in general, the compiler
touches every byte of storage that it allocates. In the extreme, wasting space
in the IR can cause locality problems and it can limit the size of the input
programs that the compiler can easily handle.

Attention to detail in the IR design can help limit IR size.

■
Represent All Facts Compactly.
Names should be converted into small
integers in the front end and translated back to strings for debugging or
output. Data structures should be laid out to avoid the need for padding
(see Section 5.6.5).

■
Represent Only Common Facts in the IR.
Relegate facts that are needed
in just a few passes or a few operations to ancillary structures. The
presence of this extra information can be encoded into another
field—for example, in the sign bit of an opcode or node type.

■
Eliminate References to Dead Ancillary Structures.
If, in a managed-
storage environment, the compiler allocates ancillary structures, it
should overwrite any explicit pointers to those structures after they are
no longer of use. Retaining such pointers keeps them alive through
garbage collection.

To understand IR size, the compiler writer can build an optional reporting
capability into the IR abstraction and use it, periodically, to examine IR space
efficiency. In our projects, we have often discovered fields that are rarely or
never used.

■
The node and pointer scheme may be harder to debug than the array
implementation. Programmers typically find array indices more intuitive
than memory addresses.

The compiler writer can achieve the easy expansion of a node and pointer
Block-contiguous allocation is mentioned
in Chapter 4 on page 188.
scheme while mitigating the allocation cost and locality issues by using a
block-contiguous allocation scheme.

A block-contiguous allocator for the tree would use a major allocator and
a minor allocator. The minor allocator keeps a free list of available nodes,
initialized to an empty list. When the minor allocator is called, it returns a
node from the free list, unless that list is empty. The common case can be
quite fast. When the free list is empty, it calls the major allocator to obtain a
Increasing k, within reason, decreases the
per-node allocation cost.
block of memory large enough to hold k nodes. It builds a free list of nodes
from that space and then returns one of them to the caller. The tree-building
code always calls the minor allocator.


Data Structures

■ FIGURE B.2 Mapping Arbitrary Trees Onto Binary Trees.

Mapping Arbitrary Trees to Binary Trees

A straightforward implementation of abstract syntax trees might support
nodes with many different numbers of children. For example, a typical for
loop header

for i = 1 to n by 2

might have a node in the AST with five children, like the one shown in
Fig. B.2(a). The node labeled body represents the subtree for the code in the
body of the for loop.

For some constructs, no fixed number of children will work. To represent
a procedure call, the AST must either custom allocate nodes based on the
number of parameters or use a single child that holds a list of parameters.
The same problem arises with a φ-function in an SSA-based IR. Using mul-
tiple node sizes complicates any code that traverses the AST; each node
needs to indicate how many children it has and the traversal must contain
code to visit each of those children. Using a list of parameters adds time and
space overhead for allocation, construction, and traversal of the lists.


Data Structures
779

To simplify the implementation of trees, the compiler writer can map the
The idea to map arbitrary trees onto binary
trees is due to Knuth [240, Vol. 1].
AST’s natural form—an arbitrary tree with variable arity nodes—onto a
uniform binary tree in which every node has precisely two children. Un-
der this map, a node’s left-child field points to its leftmost child while its
right-child field points to the next sibling at the current level in the tree. The
right-children form lists of siblings.

Fig. B.2(b) shows the for-loop header from panel (a) encoded as a binary
tree. The simplicity of the binary tree has some costs; for example, each
leaf node has an explicit null pointer. Notice also that the for node has
a pointer to the first statement after the loop; in the original version, that
pointer undoubtedly occurs in the parent of the for node. Panels (c) and (d)
show a more complex example.

Using binary trees simplifies the implementation in several ways. Uniform
nodes simplify memory allocation and work well with either an arena-based
Arena-based allocation is discussed in the
digression on page 312.
allocator or a block-contiguous allocator. Code to traverse the tree is simple
and uniform; it avoids the issues that arise with multiple node formats. This
simplicity has its cost: additional null pointers in leaf nodes.

Representing Arbitrary Graphs

Compilers must also represent arbitrary graphs, such as control-flow graphs
(CFGs) and dependence graphs. The same implementation issues arise in
graphs as in trees. Simple implementations might use heap-allocated nodes
with pointers to represent edges. Fig. B.3(a) shows a simple CFG. Clearly, it
needs three nodes. The difficulty arises with the edges: how many incoming
and outgoing edges does each node need? Each node could maintain a list
of outgoing edges; this approach leads to an implementation similar to the
one shown in Fig. B.3(b).

In Fig. B.3(b), the rectangles represent nodes, and the ovals represent edges.
This representation makes it easy to walk the graph in the direction of the
edges. If the compiler needs random access to the nodes, the compiler writer
can add an array of node pointers, indexed by the nodes’ integer names. With
that addition (not shown), the graph is suitable for solving forward data-flow
problems. It provides a fast means for finding all the successors of a node.

This representation does not facilitate traversing edges backward, as oc-
curs in the solution of a backward data-flow problem. A backward traversal
needs a fast predecessor operation. The compiler writer could add a list of
predecessors to each node, at the cost of additional time and space.

An alternative is to represent the graph as a pair of tables: a node table and
an edge table. For a given node, the node table contains the names of the


Data Structures

■ FIGURE B.3 Tabular Representation of a CFG.

edges to its first successor and its first predecessor. The edge table has an
entry for each edge; that entry contains the names of its source and sink. In
addition, each edge has a field that contains the name of the next successor
of its source and the next predecessor of its sink. These latter two tables in-
stantiate, for each node, a list of its successors and a list of its predecessors.

Fig. B.3(c) shows the CFG from panel (a) in this tabular format. While the
tables are not as obvious to read as the representations in panels (a) or (b),
they provide quick access to successors, predecessors, and individual nodes
and edges by their names (assuming that names are encoded as small inte-
gers).

The tabular representation works well for applications that traverse the
graph. When the compiler makes heavy use of other operations, better rep-
resentations exist. For example, a graph-coloring register allocator has two
dominant graph operations: iterating over a node’s neighbors and testing
for the presence of an edge between two nodes (see Section 13.4.2). These
operations suggest different representations; indeed, most coloring alloca-
tors use adjacency lists to iterate over neighbors quickly and a bit matrix to
answer the membership question—is the edge (i, j) in the graph?


Data Structures
781

Because interference graphs are both large and sparse, space for the adja-
cency vectors can become an issue. Some implementations use two passes
to build the graph—the first pass computes the size of each adjacency vector
and the second pass builds the vectors, each with the minimal required size.
Other implementations use a variant of the list representation for sets from
Section B.2.1—the graph is built in a single pass, using an unordered list
for the adjacency vector, with multiple edges per list node.

B.3.2 Linear Intermediate Forms

Conceptually, a linear intermediate form resembles a table or an array. The
various ILOC examples throughout the book, in fact, are laid out as tables.
Linear IRs have an implicit order; operations execute in order, until exe-
cution hits a branch, jump, or call. This abstract model is easy to visualize
and to analyze. In practice, however, compilers use implementations that are
more complex than a simple table.

A compiler manipulates a linear IR in a number of ways. It may change the
values of the fields in an operation; for example, register allocation changes
the register names in operations. A given pass might add, delete, or move
operations. The parser adds to the end of the IR; the register allocator inserts
spill code between existing operations. Dead code elimination removes op-
erations. Lazy code motion might move operations from the middle of one
block to the end of another; the scheduler reorders operations.

An implementation that uses a simple array-like structure may encounter
JAVA’s ArrayList construct can easily
exhibit O(n2) behavior if insertion and/or
deletion are frequent.
unexpected costs on some of these manipulations. Insertions and deletions
may be implemented by shuffling operations to create or reuse space. Ex-
panding the array may entail copying the operations to a new heap object.
Attention paid to such costs has a direct effect on the cost of compilation.

The compiler writer may use different implementation strategies in differ-
ent passes. For the front end, the goal might be to minimize the overhead of
adding additional operations onto the end of the IR. A pass that simply per-
An analysis pass should know the size of
the IR so that it can preallocate all the space
it will require.
forms data-flow analysis might do well with a single preallocated array of
structures. The scheduler needs the ability to reorder operations; the register
allocator needs to insert and delete them.

Implementing Operations

As with nodes in a tree, two basic options exist for a linear IR: allocat-
ing individual structures or allocating an array of structures. In either case,
the structure represents a single IR operation. In the first case, the individual
structures are allocated on the heap and linked using pointers (or references).
In the latter case, the structures are block allocated in one or more arrays;


Data Structures

MITIGATION STRATEGIES FOR AN INDEX-ORDER ARRAY
The simplicity of an IR implementation that uses a single array of structures,
traversed in index order, is compelling. If the compiler writer chooses this
approach, she can employ strategies to mitigate some of the disadvantages.

Insertion
Efficient insertions can be implemented with a detour operator
that directs any traversal to an out-of-line code segment. To insert
before operation i, the compiler creates a segment with the new
operations followed by a copy of operation i, followed by a detour back
to operation i + 1. It then replaces operation i with a detour to the new
code segment.

Deletion
Efficient deletions are simple. The compiler can use an ignore
operator that directs any traversal to skip to the next operation. To
delete the ith operation, the compiler overwrites it with an ignore.

If the compiler uses these mitigation techniques, it will need to allocate
additional space in the IR array to hold inserted code segments.

At the end of each pass, when the compiler writes the IR to external media
for the next pass, it can linearize the detours inline and remove the ignores.
Of course, the compiler could linearize the code in mid-pass if that was
desirable.

these can be linked using either array indices (for a single array) or point-
ers. The advantages and disadvantages are similar to those discussed in the
previous subsection.

■
With linked individual structures, the compiler can easily change the
traversal order. An array of structures implementation can use index-
order traversals, which saves the space used by pointers; this scheme
increases the cost of rearrangement.

■
With an array of structures, index-order traversal should benefit from
spatial locality and from the standard optimizations that improve dense
linear-algebra codes, such as redundancy elimination, code motion, and
strength reduction (see Chapters 8 and 10).

■
With individually allocated structures, allocation costs are higher than
they would be with an array. In a managed runtime, multiple smaller
heap objects might affect the cost of collection.

Linear forms are amenable to multiple implementation strategies. In a pass
where the IR size is known and static, the compiler writer can allocate a
single array of structures large enough to hold it. If index order traversal
suffices, as in a single block, the order can be maintained implicitly by the
index. If the order of operations may change, the compiler writer can add


Data Structures
783

pointers to each operation to create singly or doubly-linked lists and achieve
arbitrary traversal orders.

If the IR size is expected to change, the compiler writer can use an arena-
style allocator or a block-contiguous allocator. Such an implementation
usually requires pointers to link the operations, as a transparent way to link
across separately allocated arrays of structures.

Variant Node Sizes

Some operations will not fit into the standard structure for an operation. For
example, the number of source operands in an SSA-form φ-function de-
pends on the number of incoming edges in the control-flow graph. It might
be 2; it might be 32. An implementation that uses pointers to link the in-
dividual operations can simply allocate a variant structure and link it into
the IR. An implementation as an array of structures can use a detour op-
erator as suggested in the digression on page 782. Of course, the code that
manipulates the IR must understand all the variants and handle them.

B.4 IMPLEMENTING HASH TABLES

With the widespread availability of feature libraries in languages such as
JAVA and PYTHON, most students will rely on library implementations of
hash tables or maps. However, some circumstances will warrant a custom
implementation. In a heavily used compiler, such as GCC or LLVM, the
savings from a custom implementation may be significant when considered
across all the compilations done with the compiler. In other cases, a custom
implementation may take advantage of particular known properties of the
set of expected keys (e.g., single character strings or pairs of small integers).

This section describes several issues that arise in the implementation of a
custom hash table. Section B.4.1 describes two hash functions that, in prac-
tice, produce good results. Sections B.4.2 and B.4.3 present two widely used
strategies for resolving collisions: open-hashing and open-addressing. Sec-
tion B.4.4 discusses storage management issues for hash tables.

B.4.1 Choosing a Hash Function

Perhaps the most critical decision in hash-table design is the choice of a
hash function. A hash function that produces a bad distribution of index
values directly increases the average cost of both insertions and lookups.
Fortunately, the literature documents several good hash functions, including
the multiplicative hash functions described by Knuth and the universal hash
functions described by Cormen et al.


Data Structures

WORST-CASE MAPPING BEHAVIOR
Symbol-table lookups can, and sometimes do, exhibit worst-case behavior.
In the early 1980s, the authors worked on the front-end for a FORTRAN
vectorizing compiler, PFC. The author of the first version of PFC’s scanner
used an unbalanced binary tree in its symbol table.

Unfortunately, several of the key applications used to test PFC had
declaration statements that listed the variables in alphabetical order. Thus,
the scanner constructed a tree in which most of the right-subtrees were
empty; symbol-table lookups quickly devolved to O(n) time per lookup.

To remedy this situation, a graduate student was assigned to build a
hash-based table. To compute the hash, the implementation broke the
variable name into four-byte chunks and combined them with exclusive or. It
used the resulting number, modulo the table size, as an index into the table.

Unfortunately, the student chose a table size of 2,048, so the mod operation
returned the low-order 11 bits of the 32-bit word. The hash function padded
short strings with blanks to reach a full word. Thus, any one or two character
name produced the same hash key: the bottom 11 bits of “b/b/”. Since the
applications contained many single character variable names, symbol-table
lookups again trended toward O(n) time per lookup. Changing the table
size to a Mersenne number (2n - 1) cured the problem. PFC used the
implementation for many years with an initial table size of 2,047.

Multiplicative Hash Functions

A multiplicative hash function is deceptively simple. The programmer
chooses a single constant C and uses it in the following formula:

h(key) = ⌊TableSize · ((C · key) mod 1)⌋

where C is the constant, key is the integer being used as a key into the table,
and TableSize is, rather obviously, the current size of the hash table. Knuth
suggests the following value for C:

0.6180339887 ≈
√

5−1
2

The effect of the function is to compute C · key, take its fractional part with
the mod function, and multiply the result by the size of the table.

Universal Hash Functions

To implement a universal hash function, the programmer designs a family
of functions that are parameterized by a small set of constants. At execution


Data Structures
785

■ FIGURE B.4 Hash-Table Organizations.

time, values for the constants are chosen at random—either using random
The same constants are used throughout a
single run of the program that uses the hash
function, but the constants vary from run to
run.

numbers for the constants or selecting a random index into a set of previ-
ously tested constants. By varying the hash function across executions of
the program, this scheme produces different distributions in different runs
of the program. In a compiler, if the input program produced pathological
behavior in some particular compilation, it is unlikely to produce the same
behavior in subsequent compilations. To implement a universal version of
the multiplicative hash function, the compiler writer can randomly generate
an appropriate value for C at the start of each compilation.

B.4.2 Open Hashing

Open hashing, also called bucket hashing, assumes that the hash function
h produces collisions. It relies on h to partition the set of input keys into a
fixed number of sets, or buckets. Each bucket contains a linear list of records,
one record per name. LookUp(n) walks the linear list stored in the bucket
indexed by h(n) to find n. Thus, LookUp requires one evaluation of h(n) and
the traversal of a linear list. Evaluating h(n) should be fast; the list traversal
will take time proportional to the length of the list. For a table of size S,
with N names, the cost per lookup should be roughly O(N ÷ S). As long
as h distributes names fairly uniformly and the ratio of names to buckets,
N ÷ S, is small, this cost approximates our goal: O(1) time for each access.

Fig. B.4(a) shows a small hash table implemented with this scheme. It as-
sumes that h(a) = h(d) = 6 to create a collision. Thus, a and d occupy the
same slot in the table. The list structure links them together. Insert should
add to the front of the list for efficiency.


Data Structures

Open hashing has several advantages. Because it creates a new node in one
of the linked lists for every inserted name, it can handle an arbitrarily large
number of names without running out of space. An excessive number of
entries in one bucket does not affect the cost of access in other buckets.
Because the concrete representation for the set of buckets is usually an array
of pointers, the overhead for increasing S is small—one pointer for each
added bucket. This fact makes it less expensive to keep N ÷ S small.

The primary drawbacks for open hashing relate directly to these advantages.
Both can be managed.

1. Open hashing can be allocation intensive. Each insertion allocates a new
record. When implemented on a system with heavy-weight memory al-
location, the cost may be noticeable. Again, lighter-weight mechansims
such as an arena-based allocator or a block-contiguous allocator can re-
duce the allocation costs.
2. If any set gets large, LookUp degrades to linear search. With a good hash
function, this occurs only when N is much larger than S. The imple-
mentation should detect this problem and enlarge the array of buckets.
Typically, this involves allocating a new array of buckets and reinserting
each entry from the old table into the new table.

A well-implemented open hash table provides efficient access with low
overhead in both space and time.

To improve the behavior of the linear search performed in a single bucket,
the compiler can dynamically reorder the chain. Rivest and others [310,329]
describe two effective strategies: move a node up the chain by one position
on each lookup, or move it to the front of the list on each lookup. More
complex schemes to organize each bucket can be used as well. However,
the compiler writer should assess the total amount of time lost in traversing
a bucket before investing much effort in this problem.

B.4.3 Open Addressing

Open addressing, also called rehashing, handles collisions by computing
an alternative index for the names whose normal slot, at h(n), is already
occupied. In this scheme, LookUp(n) computes h(n) and examines that slot.
If the slot is empty, LookUp fails. If LookUp finds n, it succeeds. If it finds a
name other than n, it uses a second function g(n) to compute an increment
for the search. This leads it to probe the table at (h(n) + g(n)) mod S, then
at (h(n) + 2 × g(n)) mod S, then at (h(n) + 3 × g(n)) mod S, and so on,
until it either finds n, finds an empty slot, or returns to h(n) a second time.
(The table is numbered from 0 to S – 1, which ensures that mod S will return


Data Structures
787

a valid table index.) If LookUp finds an empty slot, or it returns to h(n) a
second time, it fails.

Fig. B.4(b) shows a small hash table implemented with this scheme. It uses
the same data as Fig. B.4(a). As before, h(a) = h(d) = 6, while h(b) = 8
and h(c) = 0. When d was inserted, it produced a collision with a. The
secondary hash function g(d) produced 8, so Insert placed d at index 4 in
the table ((6 + 8) mod 10 = 4). In effect, open addressing builds chains of
items similar to those used in open hashing. In open addressing, however,
the chains are stored directly in the table. A single table slot can be the start-
ing point for multiple chains, each with a different increment produced by g.

This scheme makes a subtle tradeoff of space against speed. Since each
key is stored in the table, S must be larger than N. If h and g produce good
distributions, then collisions are infrequent, the rehash chains stay short, and
access costs stay low. Because it can recompute g inexpensively, this scheme
need not store pointers to form the rehash chains—a savings of N pointers.
The compiler can instead devote that space to a larger table, which may
reduce the number of collisions. The primary advantage of open addressing
is simple: lower access costs through shorter rehash chains.

Open addressing has two primary drawbacks. Both arise as N approaches S
and the table becomes full.

1. Because rehash chains thread through the index table, a collision be-
tween n and m can interfere with a subsequent insertion of some other
name p. If h(n) = h(m) and (h(m) + g(m)) mod S = h(p), then inserting
n, followed by m, fills p’s slot in the table. When |S| ≫ |N|, this problem
has a minor impact. As N approaches S, it can become pronounced.
2. Because S must be at least as large as N, the table must be expanded if
N grows too large. (The implementation might also expand S if some
chain becomes too long.) With open addressing, expansion is needed for
correctness; with open hashing, expansion is a matter of efficiency.

Some implementations use a constant in place of g. While this approach
eliminates the cost of computing g(n), it has the downside effect that it cre-
ates a single rehash chain for each value of h. Furthermore, it merges rehash
chains whenever a secondary index encounters an already occupied table
slot. These two disadvantages probably outweigh the cost of computing
g(n). A better choice is to use the multiplicative hash function with different
constants for h and g, selected at startup from a table of constants.

The table size S plays an important role in open addressing. LookUp must
recognize when it reaches a table slot that it has already visited; otherwise,
it will not halt on failure. To make this efficient, the implementation should


Data Structures

■ FIGURE B.5 Stack Allocation for Records.

ensure that it eventually returns to h(n). If S is a prime number, then any
choice of 0<g(n)<S generates a series of probes, p1, p2, ..., pS, with
the properties that p1 = pS = h(n), and pi ̸= h(n), ∀1<i<S. That is, LookUp
will examine every slot in the table before it returns to h(n). Since the im-
plementation may need to expand the table, it should include a table of
appropriately sized prime numbers. In practice, a small set of primes will
suffice, due to the realistic limits on both program size and memory avail-
able to the compiler.

B.4.4 Storing Symbol Records

Neither open hashing nor open addressing directly addresses the issue of
how to allocate space for the information associated with each hash table
entry. Assume the compiler uses a structure to hold each symbol’s attributes.
With open hashing, the temptation is to put these structures directly into the
nodes that implement the chains. With open addressing, the temptation is to
store those structures directly in the index table. Both these approaches have
drawbacks. A separate stack of structures may achieve better results.

Fig. B.5 depicts this implementation. In an open-hashing implementation,
the chain-pointers can be stored in the stack to avoid the need to allocate
them individually. In an open-addressing implementation, the rehash chains
are still implicit in the index set, preserving the space savings that motivated
the idea.

When the actual records are stored in a stack, they form a dense table. For
Of course, the compiler writer can link
the stack entries together and use either an
arena-based allocator or a block-contiguous
allocator to handle growth in the stack.

heavyweight allocation, this scheme amortizes the cost of a large allocation
over many records. In a collected environment, it decreases the number of
objects that must be marked and collected. If the compiler writes the table
to external media, it can use blocked I/O. Finally, a dense table may provide


Data Structures
789

more locality when the compiler iterates over the symbols in the table—for
example, when the compiler assigns storage locations.

As a final advantage, this scheme simplifies expansion of the index set. The
compiler can discard the old index set, allocate a larger set, and then reinsert
the records into the new table, working from the stack’s bottom to its top.
This process eliminates the need to have both the old and new index sets in
memory at the same time. By iterating over the dense table, the compiler
does not touch empty table slots.

B.5 A FLEXIBLE SYMBOL-TABLE DESIGN

Most compilers use one or more hashed symbol tables as a central repository
for facts about the various names that appear in the source code, in the IR,
and in the generated code. During compiler development, the set of fields in
the symbol table seems to grow monotonically. Fields are added to support
new passes and to transmit information between passes. When the need for
a field disappears, it may or may not be removed from the symbol-table
definition. As fields are added, symbol table size grows and parts of the
compiler with direct access to the symbol table may need to be recompiled.

We encountered this problem in the implementation of the Rn and Para-
Scope programming environments. The experimental nature of these sys-
tems made additions and deletions of symbol-table fields a common oc-
curence. To address the problem, we designed and built a more complex but
more flexible symbol table—a two-dimensional hash table. It eliminated
most changes to the symbol-table definition and its implementation.

Fig. B.6 shows a conceptual drawing of such a table, populated for the C-like
{ char w[12];
real x;
double y;
int z;
···
}

Declarations for Fig. B.6

block shown in the margin. The implementation uses two distinct hash in-
dex tables, one for the primary key and the other for the field name, used
as a secondary key. The implementation uses the secondary key to find the
appropriate vector of data for the desired field. It uses the primary key to
select the right slot from inside that vector. Of course, the drawing hides
some complexity. Both the primary and secondary indices must be imple-
mented as full-fledged hash tables, with provisions for collision using one
of the schemes described previously.

While this scheme seems complex, it is not particularly expensive. Each
As the set of fields stabilizes, the compiler
writer can replace the table with one that
has fixed fields.
table access requires two hash computations rather than one. The imple-
mentation need not allocate storage for a given field until a value is stored
in it, which avoids the space overhead of unused fields. It allows individual
developers to create and delete symbol-table fields without interfering with
other programmers.


Data Structures

■ FIGURE B.6 Two-Dimensional Hashed Symbol Table.

The implementation provided entry points for setting initial values for a field
(by name), for deleting a field (by name), and for reporting statistics on field
use. It allowed individual programmers to manage their own symbol-table
use in a responsible and independent way, without interfering with their
colleagues.

As a final issue, the implementation was abstracted with respect to specific
symbol-table instances. That is, the same implementation managed tables in
the parser and in other parts of the compiler.

APPENDIX NOTES

Many of the algorithms in a compiler manipulate sets, maps, tables, and
graphs. The underlying implementations directly affect the space and time
that those algorithms require and, ultimately, the usability of the compiler
itself [63]. Textbooks cover many of the issues that this appendix brings
together [5,45,119,207,240].

Our research compilers have used almost all the data structures described
in this appendix. We have seen performance problems from data-structure
growth in several areas.


AppendixNotes
791

■
Abstract syntax trees, as mentioned in the sidebar in Chapter 4, can grow
unreasonably large. The technique of mapping an arbitrary tree onto a
binary tree simplifies the implementation and seems to keep overhead
low [240].

■
The tabular representation of a graph, with lists of successors and prede-
cessors, has been reinvented many times. It works particularly well for
CFGs, for which the compiler iterates over both successors and prede-
cessors. We first used this data structure in the PFC system in 1980.

■
The sets in data-flow analysis can grow quite large. Because allocation
and deallocation are performance issues at that scale, we routinely use
Hanson’s arena-based allocator [189] for the bit-vectors.

■
The size and sparsity of interference graphs makes them another area
that merits careful consideration. We use an ordered-list with multiple
set elements per node to keep the cost of building the graph low while
managing the space overhead [111].

Symbol tables play a central role in the way that compilers store and ac-
cess information. Much attention has been paid to the organization of these
tables. Reorganizing lists [310,329], balanced search trees [45,119] and
hashing [240, vol. 3] all play a role in making access to these tables ef-
ficient. Knuth [240, vol. 3] and Cormen [119] are standard references for
high-quality hash functions.


This page intentionally left blank




