Preface
It was the summer of 2015 when I began to consider the hypothesis of grouping a
series of posts on my personal blog to give shape to a more structured guide
about the use of STM32 microcontrollers. At that time, it was not trivial to setup
a complete tool-chain for the STM32 portfolio, unless you could afford a license
for the ARM Keil. Moreover, STM was migrating from the historical Standard
Peripheral Library (SPL) to the new CubeHAL SDK, and it was not clear the
path to follow to start learning this very interesting product lineup.

I so started writing the very first chapters of this book, showing how-to setup a
complete and free Eclipse tool-chain based on the GNU MCU Eclipse plug-ins
by Liviu Ionescu (now called Eclipse Embedded CDT and officially supported
by the Eclipse Foundation), and I decided to use the LeanPub platform, which
allowed me to publish an in-progress book that I could update as soon as I added
a new chapter. From the very first release of the book, many people adopted the
text and helped me a lot in shaping the book structure and its contents. It took me
two years to complete the first edition and, trust me, it was a very hard work
especially because things changed day-by-day. During the years, the book has
been adopted by several Universities around the world as official text in
Embedded System classes. A lot of people contacted me to provide feedback,
some asking for help with the text and some others with the development of their
board, some asking for a revision of the text and some others for a revision of the
examples, some criticizing the whole book and some other letting me know that
they thank me every time they go to sleep.

Seven years later things have changed. A lot. STM pushed hard the development
of both the hardware and software ecosystem. The first release of the book was
about nine STM32 families, ranging on about 500 P/N. Now there are seventeen
families in the STM32 portfolio, spreading over more than 1200 P/N. But the
huge improvement was on the software part. STM decided to fix the main issue
with the STM32 portfolio: the lack of an official tool-chain. STM acquired
Atollic and its TrueStudio IDE, and launched the STM32CubeIDE that, together
with the whole STM32Cube initiative, represents a quantum leap for the
development of STM32-based devices.

This required me to make a deep revision of the text. I so started working on this
second edition in the spring of 2021 and it took to me about one year to update
the text and to add new contents that lacked in the first edition. This is a lot of
time but things changed a lot even for me in these years. A totally different job,
full of too many responsibilities, and a daughter came in the middle, and now my
free time ranges from the 5:00am to 7:00am, and you can figure out how hard is
to work to a book with 900 pages in just two hours a day.

Even in the second edition, the book is divided in three parts: an introductory
part showing how to setup the STM32CubeIDE and how to work with it; a part
that introduces the basics of STM32 programming and the main aspects of the
official HAL (Hardware Abstraction Layer); a more advanced section covering
aspects such as the use of a Real Time Operating Systems, the boot sequence and
the memory layout of an STM32 application, advanced peripherals like the USB.

However, this book does not aim to replace official datasheets from ST
Microelectronics. A datasheet is still the main reference about electronic
devices, and it is impossible (as well as making little sense) to arrange the
content of tens of datasheets in a book. You have to consider that the official
datasheet of the one of latest - and not the most complex of the portfolio -
STM32G4 MCU alone is almost three thousand pages! Hence, this text will offer
a hint to start diving inside the official documentation from ST. Moreover, this
book will not focus on low-level topics and questions related to the hardware,
leaving this hard work to datasheets. Lastly, this book is not a cookbook about
custom and funny projects: you will find several good tutorials on the web.

Who Is This Book For?
This book is addressed to novices of the STM32 platform, interested in learning
in less time how to program these fantastic microcontrollers. However, this book
is not for people completely new to the C language or embedded programming.
I assume you have a decent knowledge of C and are not new to most fundamental
concepts of digital electronics and MCU programming. The perfect reader of this
book may be both a hobbyist or a student who is familiar with the Arduino
platform and wants to learn a more powerful and comprehensive architecture, or
a professional in charge of working with an MCU he/she does not know yet.
    What About Arduino?

    I received this question many times from several people in doubt about which MCU platform to
    learn. The answer is not simple, for several reasons.

    First of all, Arduino is not a given MCU family or a silicon manufacturer. Arduino is both a
    brand and an ecosystem. Today, there are tens of Arduino development boards available on the
    market, some with am 8-bit MCU and some other with more powerful 32-bit MCUs, even if it is
    common to refer to the Arduino UNO board as “the Arduino”. Arduino UNO is a development
    board built around the ATMega328, an 8-bit microcontroller designed by Atmel. However,
    Arduino is not only a cold piece of hardware but it is also a community built around the Arduino
    IDE (a derived version of Processing) and the Arduino libraries, which greatly simplify the
    development process on ATMega MCUs. This large, stable and continuously growing
    community has developed hundreds of libraries to interface as many hardware devices, and
    thousands of examples and applications.

    So, the question is: “Is Arduino good for professional applications or for those wanting to
    develop the last mainstream product on Kickstarter?”. The answer is: “YES, definitively.”. I
    myself have developed a couple of custom boards for a customer, and being these boards based
    on the ATMega328 IC (the SMD version), the firmware was developed using the Arduino IDE.
    So, it is not true that Arduino is only for hobbyists and students.

    However, if you are looking for something more powerful than an 8-bit MCU or if you want to
    increase your knowledge about firmware programming (the Arduino environment hides too
    much detail about what’s under the hood), the STM32 is probably the best choice for you.
    Thanks to a development environment based on Eclipse and GCC, you will not have to invest a
    fortune to start developing STM32 applications. Moreover, if you are building a cost sensitive
    device, where each PCB square inch makes a difference for you, consider that the STM32F0
    value line is also known as the 32-bits MCU for 32 cents. This means that the low-cost
    STM32 line has a price perfectly comparable with 8-bit MCUs but offers a lot more computing
    power, hardware capabilities and integrated peripherals.

How to Integrate This Book?
This book does not aim to be a full-comprehensive guide to STM32
microcontrollers but is essentially a guide to developing applications using the
official ST HAL. It is strongly suggested to integrate it with a book about the
ARM Cortex-M architecture, and the series by Joseph Yiu is the best source for
every Cortex-M developer.

How Is the Book Organized?
The book is divided in twenty-eight chapters, and they cover the following
topics.

Chapter 1 gives a brief and preliminary introduction to the STM32 platform. It
presents the main aspects of these microcontrollers, introducing the reader to the
ARM Cortex-M architecture. Moreover, the key features of each STM32
subfamily (L0, F1, etc.) are briefly explained. The chapter also introduces the
development board used throughout this book as testing board for the presented
topics: the Nucleo.

Chapter 2 shows how to setup the STM32CubeIDE to start developing STM32
applications. The chapter is divided in three different branches, each one
explaining the tool-chain setup process for the Windows, Linux and Mac OS X
platforms.

Chapter 3 is dedicated to showing how to build the first application for the
STM32 Nucleo development board. This is a really simple application, a
blinking led, which is with no doubt the Hello World application of hardware.

Chapter 4 is about the STM32CubeMX tool, our main companion every time we
need to start a new application based on an STM32 MCUs. The chapter gives a
hands-on presentation of the tool, explaining its characteristics and how to
configure the MCU peripherals according to the features we need.

Chapter 5 introduces the reader to debugging, showing a brief view of
STM32CubeIDE’s debugging capabilities. Finally, the reader is introduced to an
important topic: I/O retargeting.

Chapter 6 gives a quick overview of the ST CubeHAL, explaining how
peripherals are mapped inside the HAL using handlers to the peripheral memory
mapped region. Next, it presents the HAL_GPIO libraries and all the configuration
options offered by STM32 GPIOs.

Chapter 7 explains the mechanisms underlying the NVIC controller: the
hardware unit integrated in every STM32 MCU which is responsible for the
management of exceptions and interrupts. The HAL_NVIC module is introduced
extensively, and the differences between Cortex-M0/0+ and Cortex-M3/4/7 are
highlighted.
Chapter 8 gives a practical introduction to the HAL_UART module used to
program the UART interfaces provided by all STM32 microcontrollers.
Moreover, a quick introduction to the difference between UART and USART
interfaces is given. Two ways to exchange data between devices using a UART
are presented: polling and interrupt oriented modes. Finally we present in a
practical way how to use the integrated VCP of every Nucleo board, and how to
retarget the printf()/scanf() functions using the Nucleo’s UART.

Chapter 9 talks about the DMA controller, showing the differences between
several STM32 families like the more powerful and recent DMAMUX available
in STM32L4+/L5/Gx/H7 families. A more detailed overview of the internals of
an STM32 MCU is presented, describing the relations between the Cortex-M
core, DMA controllers and slave peripherals. Moreover, it shows how to use the
HAL_DMA module in both polling and interrupt modes. Finally, a performance
analysis of memory-to-memory transfers is presented.

Chapter 10 introduces the clock tree of an STM32 microcontroller, showing
main functional blocks and how to configure them using the HAL_RCC module.
Moreover, the CubeMX Clock configuration view is presented, explaining how
to change its settings to generate the right clock configuration.

Chapter 11 is a walkthrough into timers, one of the most advanced and highly
customizable peripherals implemented in every STM32 microcontroller. The
chapter will guide the reader step-by-step through this subject, introducing the
most fundamental concepts of basic, general purpose and advanced timers.
Moreover, several advanced usage modes (master/slave, external trigger, input
capture, output compare, PWM, etc.) are illustrated with practical examples.

Chapter 12 provides an overview of the Analog To Digital (ADC) peripheral. It
introduces the reader to the concepts underlying SAR ADCs and then it explains
how to program this useful peripheral using the designated CubeHAL module.
Moreover, this chapter provides a practical example that shows how to use a
hardware timer to drive ADC conversions in DMA mode.

Chapter 13 briefly introduces the Digital To Analog (DAC) peripheral. It
provides the most fundamental concepts underlying R-2R DACs and how to
program this useful peripheral using the designated CubeHAL module. This
chapter also shows an example detailing how to use a hardware timer to drive
DAC conversions in DMA mode.
Chapter 14 is dedicated to the I²C bus. The chapter starts introducing the
essentials of the I²C protocol, and then it shows the most relevant routines from
the CubeHAL to use this peripheral. Moreover, a complete example that explains
how to develop I²C slave applications is also shown.

Chapter 15 is dedicated to the SPI bus. The chapter starts introducing the
essentials of the SPI specification, and then it shows the most relevant routines
from the CubeHAL to use this fundamental peripheral.

Chapter 16 talks about the CRC peripheral, briefly introducing the math behind
its calculation, and it shows the related CubeHAL module used to program it.

Chapter 17 is about IWDT and WWDT timers, and it briefly introduces their
role and how to use the related CubeHAL modules to program them.

Chapter 18 talks about the RTC peripheral and its main functionalities. The most
relevant CubeHAL routines to program the RTC are also shown.

Chapter 19 introduces the reader to the power management capabilities offered
by STM32F and STM32L microcontrollers. It starts showing how Cortex-M
cores handle low-power modes, introducing WFI and WFE instructions. Then it
explains how these modes are implemented in STM32 MCUs. The corresponding
HAL_PWR module is also described.

Chapter 20 analyzes the activities involved during the compilation and linking
processes, which define the memory layout of an STM32 application. A bare-
bone application is shown, and a complete and working linker script is designed
from scratch, showing how to organize the STM32 memory space. Moreover, the
usage of CCM RAM is presented, as well as other important Cortex-M
functionalities like the vector table relocation.

Chapter 21 introduces to the internal flash memory, and its related controller,
available in all STM32 microcontrollers. It illustrates how to configure and
program this peripheral, showing the related CubeHAL routines. Moreover, a
walk-through of the STM32F7 bus and memory organization introduces the
reader to the architecture of these high-performing MCUs.

Chapter 22 describes the operations performed by STM32 microcontrollers at
startup. The whole booting process is described, and some advanced techniques
(like the vector table relocation in Cortex-M0 microcontrollers) are explained.
Moreover, a custom and secure bootloader is shown, which can upgrade the on-
board firmware through the USART peripheral. The bootloader uses the AES
algorithm to encrypt the firmware.

Chapter 23 is dedicated to the FreeRTOS Real-Time Operating System. It
introduces the reader to the most relevant concepts underlying an RTOS and
shows how to use the main FreeRTOS functionalities (like threads, semaphores,
mutexes, and so on) using the CMSIS-RTOS v2 layer developed by ST on top of
the FreeRTOS API. Moreover, some advanced techniques, like the tickless mode
in low-power design and the handling of concurrency with C stdlib are shown.

Chapter 24 introduces the reader to some advanced debugging techniques. The
chapter starts explaining the role of the fault-related exceptions in Cortex-M
based cores, and how to interpret the related hardware registers to go back to the
source of fault. Moreover, all STM32CubeIDE advanced debugging tools are
presented, such as watchpoints, expressions and SWV-related tools. Finally, a
brief introduction to SEGGER J-LINK professional debuggers is given, and to
the way to use them in the Eclipse tool-chain.

Chapter 25 briefly introduces the reader to the FatFs middleware. This library
allows to manipulate structured filesystems created with the widespread
FAT12/16/32 filesystem. The chapter also shows the way ST engineers have
integrated this library in the CubeHAL. Finally, it provides an overview of the
most relevant FatFs routines and configuration options.

Chapter 26 describes a solution to interface Nucleo boards to the Internet by
using the W5500 network processor. The chapter shows how-to develop
Internet- and web-based applications using STM32 microcontrollers even if they
do not provide a native Ethernet peripheral. Moreover, the chapter introduces the
reader to possible strategies to handle dynamic content in static web pages.
Finally, an application of the FatFs middleware is shown, in order to store web
pages and alike on an external SD card.

Chapter 27 introduces to one of the widespread communication protocols: the
USB 2.0. The Chapter will guide the reader to the fundamentals of USB
specification, both from the hardware and the communication protocol point-of-
view. Moreover, the STM32 USB Device Stack is deeply explained, with
practical examples about USB-CDC and USB-HID classes.
Chapter 28 shows how to start a new custom PCB design using an STM32
MCU. This chapter is mainly focused on hardware related aspects such as
decoupling, signal routing techniques and so on. Moreover, it shows how to use
CubeMX during the PCB design process and how to generate the application
skeleton when the board design is complete.

During the book you will find some horizontal rulers with “badges”, like the one
above. This means that the instructions in that part of the book are specific for a
given family of STM32 microcontrollers. Sometimes, you could find a badge
with a specific MCU type: this means that instructions are exclusively related to
that MCU. A black horizontal ruler (like the one below) closes the specific
section. This means that the text returns to be generic for the whole STM32
platform.

You will also find several asides, each one starting with an icon on the left. Let
us explain them.

       This a warning box. The text contained explains important aspects or gives important instructions.
       It is strongly recommended to read the text carefully and follow the instructions.

       This is an information box. The text contained clarifies some concepts introduced before.

       This is a tip box. It contains suggestions to the reader that could simplify the learning process.
       This a discussion box, and it is used to talk about the subject in a broader way.

       This a bug-related box, used to report some specific and/or un-resolved bug (both hardware and
       software).

Differences With the First Edition
Every next release is never a complete refactoring of the previous one. And this
is also true for technical books. This second edition has some major differences
with the first edition:

     It is updated to the recent evolutions of the STM32 portfolio.
     It was completely changed to cover the STM32CubeIDE tool-chain that is
     different from the one shown in the first edition (even if both are based on
     Eclipse and GCC).
     It fixes several errors (some really severe).
     It introduces completely new topics not available in the first edition.

If you want to have a detail of the differences in each chapter, then you can jump
to the Appendix D.

About the Author
When someone asks me about my career and my studies, I like to say that I am a
high-level programmer that someday has started fighting against bits.

I began my career in informatics when I was only a young boy with an 80286 PC
but, unlike all those who started programming in BASIC, I decided to learn a
quite uncommon language: Clipper. Clipper was a language mostly used to write
software for banks, and a lot of people suggested that I should start with this
programming language (uh?!?). When visual environments, like Windows 3.1,
started to be more common, I decided to learn the foundations of Visual Basic
and I wrote several programs with it (one of them, a program for patient
management for medical doctors, made it to the market) until I began college,
where I started programming in Unix environments and programming languages
like C/C++. One day I discovered what would become the programming
language of my life: Python. I have written hundreds of thousands of lines of code
in Python, ranging from web systems to embedded devices. I think Python is an
expressive and productive programming language, and it is always my first
choice when I have to code something.

For about eight years I worked as a research assistant at the National Research
Council in Italy (CNR), where I spent my time coding web-based and distributed
content management systems. In 2010 my professional life changed dramatically.
For several reasons that I will not detail here, I found myself slingshot into a
world I had always considered obscure: electronics. I first started developing
firmware on low-cost MCUs, then designing custom PCBs. In 2010 I co-founded
a company that produced wireless sensors and control boards used for small
scale automation. Unfortunately, this company was unlucky, and it did not reach
the success we wanted.

In 2013 I was introduced to the STM32 world during a presentation day at the ST
headquarters in Naples. Since then, I have successfully used STM32
microcontrollers in several products I have designed, ranging from industrial
automation to security tokens. Even thanks to the success of this book, I currently
work mainly as a full-time hardware consultant for some Italian companies.

In 2016 I joined Bit4id, a world-wide leader in the sector of PKI systems. I
started as hardware consultant to help developing a Bluetooth smart card reader
and I ended up few years later to become the head of the most relevant
company’s Business Unit, managing a total business of ~€12M, thousands of
customers, more than 30 brilliant engineers, salespeople and a complete
production for ~2M devices every year. To support this switch to a more
management role, I attended an MBA in one of the EU business school.
Do I like this new life in a management role? Next question??!?! :-D

In 2021 my first daughter appeared in my life. Well, since then things changed a
lot, as you can figure out. My spare time reduced a lot, and this is one of the
reasons why the second edition of the book is really late ;-)

Errata and Suggestions
I am aware of the fact that there are several errors in the text. Unfortunately,
English is not my mother tongue, and this is one of the main reasons I like lean
publishing: being an in-progress book I have all the time to check and correct
them. I have decided that once this book reaches completion, I will look for a
professional editor to help me fix all the mistakes in my English. However, feel
free to contact me to signal what you find.

On the other end, I am totally open to suggestions and improvements about book
content. I like to think that this book will save your day every time you need to
understand an aspect related to STM32 programming, so feel free to suggest any
topic you are interested in, or to signal parts of the book which are not clear or
well explained.

You can reach me through this book website:
http://www.carminenoviello.com/en/mastering-stm32/

Book Support
I have setup a small forum on my personal website as support site for the topics
presented in this book. For any question, please subscribe here:
http://www.carminenoviello.com/en/mastering-stm32/.

It is impossible for me to answer questions sent privately by e-mail, since
they are often variations on the same topic. I hope you understand.

How to Help the Author
If you want to help me, you may consider to:

     give me feedback about unclear things or errors contained both in the text
     and examples;
     write a small review about what you think1 of this book in the feedback
     section;
     use your favorite social network or blog to spread the word. The suggested
     hashtag for this book on Twitter is #MasteringSTM32;

Copyright Disclaimer
This book contains references to several products and technologies whose
copyright is owned by their respective companies, organizations or individuals.

ART™ Accelerator, STM32, ST-LINK, STM32Cube, STM32CubeIDE,
STM32Programmer and the STM32 logo with the white butterfly on the cover
of this book are copyright ©ST Microelectronics NV.

ARM, Cortex, Cortex-M, CoreSight, CoreLink, Thumb, Thumb-2, TrustZone,
AMBA, AHB, APB, Keil are registered trademarks of ARM Holdings.

GCC, GDB and other tools from the GNU Collection Compilers mentioned in
this book are copyright © Free Software Foundation.

Eclipse is copyright of the Eclipse community and all its contributors.

During the rest of the book, I will mention the copyright of tools and libraries I
will introduce. If I have forgot to attribute copyrights for products and software
used in this book, and you think I should add them here, please e-mail me through
the LeanPub platform.

Credits
The cover of this book was designed by Alessandro Migliorato (AleMiglio)
Acknowledgments to the First Edition
Even if there is just my name on the cover, this book would not have been
possible without the help of a lot of people who have contributed during its
development.

First and foremost, I big thank you to Alan Smith, manager of the ST
Microelectronics site in Naples (Arzano - Italy). Alan, with persistence and
great determination, came to my office more than three years ago bringing a
couple of Nucleo boards with him. He said to me: You must know STM32!.
This book was born almost that day!

I would like to thank several people that silently and actively contributed to
this work. Enrico Colombini (aka Erix) helped me a lot during the early
stages of this book, by reviewing several parts of it. Without his initial
support and suggestions, probably this book would have never seen the end.
For a self-publishing and in-progress author the early feedback is paramount
to better understand how to arrange a so complex work.
Ubaldo de Feo (aka @ubi also helped me a lot by providing technical
feedback and by performing an excellent proof-reading of some chapters.
Another special thanks goes to Davide Ruggiero, from ST Microelectronics
in Naples, who helped me by reviewing several examples and editing the
chapter about CRC peripheral (Davide is a mathematician and he better
knows how to approach formulas :-)). Davide also actively contributed by
donating me some wine bottles: without adequate fuel you cannot write a 900
pages book!
Some english speaking people tried to help me with my poor english,
dedicating a lot of time and effort to several parts of the text. So a big thank
you to: Omar Shaker, Roger Berger, J. Clarke, William Den Beste, J.Behloul,
M.Kaiser. I hope not to forget anyone.

A big thanks also to all early adopters of the book, especially to those ones
that bought it when it was made of just few chapters. This fundamental
encouragement gave me the necessary energies to complete a so long and
hard work.
Regards,
Carmine I.D. Noviello
I Introduction
