1. Introduction to STM32 MCU Portfolio
This chapter gives a brief introduction to the entire STM32 portfolio. Its goal is
to introduce the reader to this rather complex family of microcontrollers
subdivided in seventeen distinct sub-families. These share a set of
characteristics and present features specific to the given series. Moreover, a
quick introduction to the Cortex-M architecture is presented. Far from wanting to
be a complete reference to either the Cortex-M architecture or STM32
microcontrollers, it aims at being a guide for the readers in choosing the
microcontroller that best suits their development needs, considering that, with
more than 1200 MCUs to choose from, it is not easy to decide which one fits the
bill.

1.1 Introduction to ARM Based Processors
With the term ARM we nowadays refer to both a multitude of families of
Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architectures and several families
of complete cores which are the building blocks (hence the term core) of CPUs
produced by many silicon manufacturers. When dealing with ARM based
processors, a lot of confusion may arise since there are many different ARM
architecture revisions (ARMv6, ATMv6-M, ARMv7-M, ARMv7-A, ARMv8-M
and so on) and many core architectures, which are in turn based on an ARM
architecture revision. For the sake of clarity, for example, a processor based on
the Cortex-M4 core is designed on the ARMv7-M architecture.

An ARM architecture is a set of specifications regarding the instruction set, the
execution model, the memory organization and layout, the instruction cycles and
more, which precisely describes a machine that will implement said
architecture. If your compiler is able to generate assembly instructions for that
architecture, it is able to generate machine code for all those actual machines
(aka, processors) implementing that given architecture.

Cortex-M is a family of physical cores designed to be further integrated with
vendor-specific silicon devices to form a finished microcontroller. The way a
core works is not only defined by its related ARM architecture (eg. ARMv7-M),
but also by the integrated peripherals and hardware capabilities defined by the
silicon manufacturer. For example, the Cortex-M4 core architecture is designed
to support bit-data access operations in two specific memory regions using a
feature called bit-banding, but it is up to the actual implementation to add such
feature or not. The STM32F1 is a family of MCUs based on the Cortex-M3 core
that implements this bit-banding feature. Figure 1.1 clearly shows the relation
between a Cortex-M3 based MCU and its Cortex-M3 core.

Figure 1.1: The relation
                                between a Cortex-M3
                                core and a Cortex-M3
                                     based MCU

ARM Holdings is a British company, subsidiary of the Softbank Japanese
holding, that develops the instruction set and architecture for ARM-based
products but does not manufacture devices. This is an important aspect of the
ARM world, and the reason why there are many manufacturers of silicon that
develop, produce and sell microcontrollers based on the ARM architectures and
cores. ST Microelectronics is one of them, and it is currently one of few
manufacturers selling a complete portfolio of Cortex-M based processors.

ARM Holdings neither manufactures nor sells CPU devices based on its own
designs, but rather licenses the processor architecture to interested parties. ARM
offers a variety of licensing terms, varying in cost and deliverables. When
referring to Cortex-M cores, it is also common to talk about Intellectual Property
(IP) cores, meaning a chip design layout which is considered the intellectual
property of one party, namely ARM Holdings.
Thanks to this business model and to important features such as low power
capabilities, low production costs of some architectures and so on, ARM is the
most widely used instruction set architecture in terms of quantity. ARM based
products have become extremely popular. More than 160 billion ARM
processors have been produced as of 2020. ARM based processors equip about
95% of the world’s mobile devices. A lot of mainstream and popular 64-bit and
multi-cores CPUs, used in devices that have become icons in the electronic
industry (i.e.: Apple’s iPhone), are based on an ARM core. In recent years,
Apple announced the Apple M1, which is an ARM-based SoC (based on
ARMv8.5-A architecture) designed by Apple itself as a Central Processing Unit
(CPU) and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) for its Macintosh computers and
iPad Pro tablets.

Being a sort of widespread standard, there are a lot of compilers and tools, as
well as Operating Systems (Linux is the most used OS on Cortex-A processors)
which support these architectures, offering developers plenty of opportunities to
build their applications.

1.1.1 Cortex and Cortex-M Based Processors

ARM Cortex is a wide set of 32/64-bit architectures and cores really popular in
the embedded world. Cortex microcontrollers are divided into three main
subfamilies:

     Cortex-A, which stands for Application, is a series of processors
     providing a range of solutions for devices undertaking complex computing
     tasks, such as hosting a rich Operating System (OS) platform (Linux and its
     derivative Android are the most common ones), and supporting multiple
     software applications. Cortex-A cores equip the processors found in most
     of mobile devices, like phones and tablets. In this market segment we can
     find several silicon manufacturers ranging from those who sell catalogue
     parts (TI, Freescale and STM with the STM32MP1) to those who produce
     processors for other licensees. Among the most common cores in this
     segment, we can find popular Cortex-A7 and Cortex-A9 32-bit processors
     (they are still common on several cheap Single Board Computers (SBC)),
     as well as the latest ultra-performance 64-bit Cortex-A77 and Cortex-A78
     cores.
     Cortex-M, which stands for eMbedded, is a range of scalable, compatible,
     energy efficient and easy to use processors designed for the low-cost
     embedded market. The Cortex-M family is optimized for cost and power
     sensitive MCUs suitable for applications such as Internet of Things,
     connectivity, motor control, smart metering, human interface devices,
     automotive and industrial control systems, domestic household appliances,
     consumer products and medical instruments. In this market segment, we can
     find many silicon manufacturers who produce Cortex-M processors: ST
     Microelectronics is one of them.
     Cortex-R, which stand for Real-Time, is a series of processors offering
     high-performance computing solutions for embedded systems where
     reliability, high availability, fault tolerance, maintainability and
     deterministic real-time response are essential. Cortex-R series processors
     deliver fast and deterministic processing and high performance, while
     meeting challenging real-time constraints. They combine these features in a
     performance, power and area optimized package, making them the trusted
     choice in reliable systems demanding fault tolerance.

The next sections will introduce the main features of Cortex-M processors,
especially from the embedded developer point of view.

1.1.1.1 Core Registers

Like all RISC architectures, Cortex-M processors are load/store machines,
which perform operations only on CPU registers except1 for two categories of
instructions: load and store, used to transfer data between CPU registers and
memory locations.

Figure 1.2 shows the core Cortex-M registers. Some of them are available only
in the higher performance series like M3, M4 and M7. R0-R12 are general-
purpose registers and can be used as operands for ARM instructions. Some
general-purpose registers, however, can be used by the compiler as registers
with special functions. R13 is the Stack Pointer (SP) register, which is also said
to be banked. This means that the register content changes according to the
current CPU mode (privileged or unprivileged). This function is typically used
by Real Time Operating Systems (RTOS) to do context switching.
Figure 1.2: ARM Cortex-M core registers

For example, consider the following C code using the local variables “a”, “b”,
“c”:
...
       uint8_t a,b,c;

       a = 3;
       b = 2;
       c = a * b;
...

Compiler will generate the following ARM assembly code2:
1 movs     r3, #3       ;move "3" in register r3
2 strb     r3, [r7, #7] ;store the content of r3 in "a"
3 movs     r3, #2       ;move "2" in register r3
4 strb     r3, [r7, #6] ;store the content of r3 in "b"
5 ldrb     r2, [r7, #7] ;load the content of "a" in r2
6 ldrb     r3, [r7, #6] ;load the content of "b" in r3
7 smulbb   r3, r2, r3   ;multiply "a" with "b" and store result in r3
8 strb     r3, [r7, #5] ;store the result in "c"

As we can see, all the operations always involve a register. Instructions at lines
1-2 move the number 3 into the register r3 and then store its content (that is, the
number 3) inside the memory location given by the register r7 plus an offset of 7
memory locations - that is the place where a variable is stored. The same
happens for the variable b at lines 3-4. Then lines 5-7 load the content of
variables a and b and perform the multiplication. Finally, line 8 stores the result
in the memory location of variable c.

Figure 1.3: Cortex-M fixed memory address space

1.1.1.2 Memory Map

ARM defines a standardized memory address space common to all Cortex-M
cores, which ensures code portability among different silicon manufacturers. The
address space is 4GB wide, and it is organized in several sub-regions with
different logical functionalities. Figure 1.3 shows the memory layout of a
Cortex-M processor 3.

The first 512MB are dedicated to code area. STM32 devices further divide this
area in some sub-regions as shown in Figure 1.4. Let us briefly introduce them.
Figure 1.4: Memory layout of Code Area on STM32
                                        MCUs

All Cortex-M processors map the code area starting at address 0x0000 00004.
This area also includes the pointer to the beginning of the stack (usually placed in
SRAM) and the vector table, as we will see in Chapter 7. The position of the
code area is standardized among all other Cortex-M vendors, even if the core
architecture is sufficiently flexible to allow manufacturers to arrange this area in
a different way. In fact, for all STM32 devices an area starting at address
0x0800 0000 is bound to the internal MCU flash memory, and it is the area
where program code resides. However, thanks to a specific boot configuration
we will explore in Chapter 22, this area is also aliased from address 0x0000
0000. This means that it is perfectly possible to refer to the content of the flash
memory both starting at address 0x0800 0000 and 0x0000 0000 (for example, a
routine located at address 0x0800 16DC can also be accessed from 0x0000
16DC).

The last two sections are dedicated to System memory and Option bytes. The
first one is a ROM region reserved to bootloaders. Each STM32 family (and
their sub-families - low density, medium density, and so on) provides a
bootloader pre-programmed into the chip during production. As we will see in
Chapter 22, this bootloader can be used to load code from several peripherals,
including USARTs, USB and CAN bus. The Option bytes region contains a
series of bit flags which can be used to configure several aspects of the MCU
(such as flash read protection, hardware watchdog, boot mode and so on) and are
related to the specific STM32 microcontroller.
Going back to the whole 4GB address space, the next main region is the one
bounded to the internal MCU SRAM. It starts at address 0x2000 0000 and can
potentially extend to 0x3FFF FFFF. However, the actual end address depends on
the effective amount of internal SRAM. For example, in the case of an
STM32F103RB MCU with 20KB of SRAM, we have a final address of 0x2000
4FFF5. Trying to access a location outside of this area will cause a Bus Fault
exception (more about this later).

The next 0.5GB of memory is dedicated to the mapping of peripherals. Every
peripheral provided by the MCU (timers, I²C and SPI interfaces, USARTs, and
so on) has an alias in this region. It is up to the specific MCU to organize this
memory space.

The next 2GB area is dedicated to external SRAM or flash. Cortex-M devices
can execute code and load/store data from external memory, which extend the
internal memory resources, through the EMI/FSMC interface. Some STM32
devices, like the STM32F7, are able to execute code from external memory
without performance bottlenecks, thanks to an L1 cache and the ART™
Accelerator.

The final 0.5 GB of memory is allocated to the internal (core) Cortex processor
peripherals, plus a reserved area for future enhancements to Cortex processors.
All Cortex processor registers are at fixed locations for all Cortex-based
microcontrollers. This allows code to be more easily ported between different
STM32 variants and indeed other vendors’ Cortex-based microcontrollers.

1.1.1.3 Bit-Banding

In embedded applications, it is quite common to work with single bits of a word
using bit masking. For example, suppose that we want to set or clear the 3rd bit
(bit 2) of an unsigned byte. We can simply do this using the following C code:
...
uint8_t temp = 0;

temp |= 0x4;
temp &= ~0x4;
...

Bit masking is used when we want to save space in memory (using one single
variable and assigning a different meaning to each of its bits) or we have to deal
with internal MCU registers and peripherals. Considering the previous C code,
we can see that the compiler will generate the following ARM assembly code6:
#temp |= 0x4;
a:       79fb           ldrb    r3, [r7, #7]
c:       f043 0304      orr.w   r3, r3, #4
10:     71fb            strb    r3, [r7, #7]
#temp &= ~0x4;
12:     79fb            ldrb    r3, [r7, #7]
14:     f023 0304       bic.w   r3, r3, #4
18:     71fb            strb    r3, [r7, #7]

As we can see, such a simple operation requires three assembly instructions
(fetch, modify, save). This leads to two types of problems. First of all, there is a
waste of CPU cycles related to those three instructions. Second, that code works
fine if the CPU is working in single task mode, and we have just one execution
stream, but, if we are dealing with concurrent execution, another task (or simply
an interrupt routine) may affect the content of the memory before we complete the
“bit mask” operation (that is, for example, an interrupt occurs between
instructions at lines 0xC-0x10 or 0x14-0x18 in the above assembly code).

Bit-banding is the ability to map each bit of a given area of memory to a whole
word in the aliased bit-banding memory region, allowing atomic access to such
bit. Figure 1.5 shows how the Cortex CPU aliases the content of memory address
0x2000 0000 to the bit-banding region 0x2200 0000-1c. For example, if we
want to modify (bit 2) of 0x2000 0000 memory location we can simply access
to 0x2200 0008 memory location.

Figure 1.5: Memory mapping of SRAM address 0x2000
                       0000 in bit-banding region (first 8 of 32 bits shown)

This is the formula to compute the addresses for alias regions:
bit_band_address = alias_region_base + (region_base_offset x 32)
+ (bit_number x 4)

For example, considering the memory address of Figure 1.5, to access bit 2 :

alias_region_base = 0x22000000
region_base_offset = 0x20000000 - 0x20000000 = 0
bit_band_address = 0x22000000 + 0*32 + (0x2 x 0x4) = 0x22000008

ARM defines two bit-band regions for Cortex-M3/4 based MCUs, each one is
1MB wide and mapped to a 32Mbit bit-band alias region. Each consecutive 32-
bit word in the “alias” memory region refers to each consecutive bit in the “bit-
band” region (which explains that size relationship: 1Mbit <-> 32Mbit). The first
one starts at 0x2000 0000 and ends at 0x200F FFFF, and it is aliased from
0x2200 0000 to 0x23FF FFFF. It is dedicated to the bit access of SRAM
memory locations. Another bit-banding region starts at 0x4000 0000 and ends at
0x400F FFFF, as shown in Figure 1.6.

Figure 1.6: Memory map and bit-banding regions

This other region is dedicated to the memory mapping of peripherals. For
example, ST maps the GPIO Output Data Register (GPIO->ODR) of GPIOA
peripheral from 0x4002 0014. This means that each bit of the word addressed at
0x4002 0014 allows modifying the output state of a GPIO (from LOW to HIGH
and vice versa). So if we want to modify the status of PIN5 of GPIOA port7,
using the previous formula we have:

alias_region_base = 0x42000000
region_base_offset = 0x40020014 - 0x40000000 = 0x20014
bit_band_address = 0x42000000 + 0x20014*32 + (0x5 x 0x4) =
0x42400294

We can define two macros in C that allow to easily compute bit-band alias
addresses:
 1 // Define base address of bit-band
 2 #define BITBAND_SRAM_BASE 0x20000000
 3 // Define base address of alias band
 4 #define ALIAS_SRAM_BASE 0x22000000
 5 // Convert SRAM address to alias region
 6 #define BITBAND_SRAM(a,b) ((ALIAS_SRAM_BASE + ((uint32_t)&(a)-
BITBAND_SRAM_BASE)*32 + (b*4)))
 7
 8 // Define base address of peripheral bit-band
 9 #define BITBAND_PERI_BASE 0x40000000
10 // Define base address of peripheral alias band
11 #define ALIAS_PERI_BASE 0x42000000
12 // Convert PERI address to alias region
13 #define BITBAND_PERI(a,b) ((ALIAS_PERI_BASE + ((uint32_t)a-BITBAND_PERI_BASE)*32 +
(b*4)))

Still using the above example, we can quickly modify the state of PIN5 of the
GPIOA port as follows:
1 #define GPIOA_PERH_ADDR 0x40020000
2 #define ODR_ADDR_OFF    0x14
3
4 uint32_t *GPIOA_ODR = GPIOA_PERH_ADDR + ODR_ADDR_OFF;
5 uint32_t *GPIOA_PIN5 = BITBAND_PERI(GPIOA_ODR, 5);
6
7 *GPIOA_PIN5 = 0x1; // Turns GPIO HIGH

1.1.1.4 Thumb-2 and Memory Alignment

Historically, ARM processors provide 32-bit instructions set. This not only
allows for a rich set of instructions, but also guarantees the best performance
during the execution of instructions involving arithmetic operations and memory
transfers between core registers and SRAM. However, a 32-bit instruction set
has a cost in terms of memory footprint of the firmware. This means that a
program written with a 32-bit Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) requires a
higher amount of bytes of flash storage, which impacts on power consumption
and overall costs of the MCU (silicon wafers are expensive, and manufacturers
constantly shrink chips size to reduce their cost).

To address such issues, ARM introduced the Thumb 16-bit instruction set, which
is a subset of the most commonly used 32-bit one. Thumb instructions are each
16 bits long and are automatically “translated” to the corresponding 32-bit ARM
instruction that has the same effect on the processor model. This means that 16-
bit Thumb instructions are transparently expanded (from the developer point of
view) to full 32-bit ARM instructions in real time, without performance loss.
Thumb code is typically 65% the size of ARM code and provides 160% the
performance of the latter when running from a 16-bit memory system; however,
in Thumb, the 16-bit opcodes have less functionality. For example, only branches
can be conditional, and many opcodes are restricted to accessing only half of all
of the CPU’s general-purpose registers.
Afterwards, ARM introduced the Thumb-2 instruction set, which is a mix of 16
and 32-bit instruction sets in one operation state. Thumb-2 is a variable length
instruction set and offers a lot more instructions compared to the Thumb one,
achieving similar code density.

Figure 1.7: Difference between aligned and unaligned memory access

Cortex-M3/4/7 were designed to support the full Thumb and Thumb-2 instruction
sets, and some of them support other instruction sets dedicated to Floating Point
operations (Cortex-M4/7) and Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD)
operations (also known as NEON instructions).

Another interesting feature of Cortex-M3/4/7 cores is the ability to do unaligned
access to memory. ARM based CPUs are traditionally capable of accessing byte
(8-bit), half word (16-bit) and word (32-bit) signed and unsigned variables,
without increasing the number of assembly instructions as it happens on 8-bit
MCU architectures. However, early ARM architectures were unable to perform
unaligned memory access, causing a waste of memory locations.

To understand the problem, consider the left diagram in Figure 1.7. Here we
have eight variables. With memory aligned access we mean that to access the
word variables (1 and 4 in the diagram), we need to access addresses which are
multiples of 32-bits (4 bytes). That is, a word variable can be stored only in
0x2000 0000, 0x2000 0004, 0x2000 0008 and so on. Every attempt to access a
location which is not a multiple of 4 causes a UsageFaults exception. So, the
following ARM pseudo-instruction is not correct:

STR R2, 0x20000002

The same applies for half word access: it is possible to access to memory
locations stored at multiple of 2 bytes: 0x2000 0000, 0x2000 0002, 0x2000
0004 and so on. This limitation causes fragmentation inside the RAM memory.
To solve this issue, Cortex-M3/4/7 based MCUs are able to perform unaligned
memory access, as shown in the right diagram in Figure 1.7. As we can see,
variable 4 is stored starting at address 0x2000 0007 (in early ARM
architectures this was only possible with single byte variables). This allows us
to store variable 5 in memory location 0x2000 000b, causing variable 8 to be
stored in 0x2000 000e. Memory is now packed, and we have saved 4 bytes of
SRAM.

However, unaligned access is restricted to the following ARM instructions:

      LDR, LDRT
      LDRH, LDRHT
      LDRSH, LDRSHT
      STR, STRT
      STRH, STRHT

1.1.1.5 Pipeline

Whenever we talk about instructions execution, we are making a series of non-
trivial assumptions. Before an instruction is executed, the CPU has to fetch it
from memory and decode it. This procedure consumes several CPU cycles,
depending on the memory and core CPU architecture, which is added to the
actual instruction cost (that is, the number of cycles required to execute the given
instruction).

Modern CPUs introduce a way to parallelize these operations in order to
increase their instructions throughput (the number of instructions which can be
executed in a unit of time). The basic instruction cycle is broken up into a series
of steps, as if the instructions traveled along a pipeline. Rather than processing
each instruction sequentially (one at a time, finishing one instruction before
starting with the next one), each instruction is split into a sequence of stages so
that different steps can be executed in parallel.

Figure 1.8: Three stage instruction pipeline

All Cortex-M based microcontrollers introduce a form of pipelining. The most
common one is the 3-stage pipeline, as shown in Figure 1.8. 3-stage pipeline is
supported by Cortex-M0/3/4. Cortex-M0+ cores, which are dedicated to low-
power MCUs, provide a 2-stage pipeline (although pipelining helps reducing the
time cost related to the instruction’s fetch/decode/execution cycle, it introduces
an energy cost which must be minimized in low-power applications). Cortex-M7
cores provide a 6-stage pipeline.

When dealing with pipelines, branching is an issue to be addressed. Program
execution is all about taking different paths; this is achieved through branching
(if equal goto). Unfortunately, branching causes the invalidation of pipeline
streams, as shown in Figure 1.9. The last two instructions have been loaded into
the pipeline, but they are discarded due to the optional branch path being taken
(we usually refer to them as branch shadows)

Figure 1.9: Branching in program execution
                                   related to pipelining

Even in this case there are several techniques to minimize the impact of
branching. They are often referred as branching prediction techniques. The idea
behind these techniques is that the CPU starts fetching and decoding both the
instructions following the branching and the ones that would be reached if the
branch were to happen (in Figure 1.9 both MOV and ADD instructions). There are,
however, other ways to implement a branch prediction scheme. If you want to
look deeper into this subject, this post from the official ARM support forum is a
good starting point.

1.1.1.6 Interrupts and Exceptions Handling

Interrupts and exception management is one of the most powerful features of
Cortex-M based processors. Interrupts and exceptions are asynchronous events
that alter the program flow. When an exception or an interrupt occurs, the CPU
suspends the execution of the current task, saves its context (that is, its stack
pointer) and starts the execution of a routine designed to handle the interrupting
event. This routine is called Exception Handler in case of exceptions and
Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) in case of an interrupt. After the exception or
interrupt has been handled, the CPU resumes the previous execution flow, and the
previous task can continue its execution8.
Table 1.1: Cortex-M exception types

In the ARM architecture, interrupts are one type of exception. Interrupts are
usually generated from on-chip peripherals (e.g., a timer) or external inputs (e.g.,
a tactile switch connected to a GPIO), and in some cases they can be triggered by
software. Exceptions are, instead, related to software execution, and the CPU
itself can be a source of exceptions. These could be fault events such as an
attempt to access an invalid memory location, or events generated by the
Operating System, if any.

Each exception (and hence interrupt) has a number which uniquely identifies it.
Table 1.1 shows the predefined exceptions common to all Cortex-M cores, plus
a variable number of user-defined ones related to interrupts management. This
number reflects the position of the exception handler routine inside the vector
table, where the actual address of the routine is stored. For example, position 15
contains the memory address of a code area containing the exception handler for
the SysTick interrupt, generated when the SysTick timer reaches zero.
Other than the first three, each exception can be assigned a priority level, which
defines the processing order in case of concurrent interrupts: the lower the
number, the higher the priority. For example, suppose we have two interrupt
routines related to external inputs A and B. We can assign a higher-priority
interrupt (lower number) to input A. If the interrupt related to A arrives while the
processor is serving the interrupt from input B the execution of B is suspended,
allowing the higher priority interrupt service routine to be executed immediately.

Both exceptions and interrupts are processed by a dedicated unit called Nested
Vectored Interrupt Controller (NVIC). The NVIC has the following features:

     Flexible exception and interrupt management: NVIC is able to process
     both interrupt signals/requests coming from peripherals and exceptions
     coming from the processor core, allowing us to enable/disable them in
     software (except for NMI9).
     Nested exception/interrupt support: NVIC allows the assignment of
     priority levels to exceptions and interrupts (except for the first three
     exception types), giving the possibility to categorize interrupts based on
     user needs.
     Vectored exception/interrupt entry: NVIC automatically locates the
     position of the exception handler related to an exception/interrupt, without
     need of additional code.
     Interrupt masking: developers are free to suspend the execution of all
     exception handlers (except for NMI), or to suspend some of them on a
     priority level basis, thanks to a set of dedicated registers. This allows the
     execution of critical tasks in a safe way, without dealing with asynchronous
     interruptions.
     Deterministic interrupt latency: one interesting feature of NVIC is the
     deterministic latency of interrupt processing, which is equal to 12 cycles for
     all Cortex-M3/4 cores, 15 cycles for Cortex-M0, 16 cycles for Cortex-
     M0+, regardless of the processor’s current status.
     Relocation of exception handlers: as we will later in the book, exception
     handlers can be relocated to other flash memory locations as well as totally
     different - even external - non-read-only memory. This offers a great degree
     of flexibility for advanced applications.

1.1.1.7 SysTimer
Cortex-M based processors can optionally provide a System Timer, also known
as SysTick. The good news is that all STM32 devices provide one, as shown in
Table 1.3.
SysTick is a 24-bit down-counting timer used to provide a system tick for Real
Time Operating Systems (RTOS) like FreeRTOS. It is used to generate periodic
interrupts to scheduled tasks. Programmers can define the update frequency of
SysTick timer by setting its registers. SysTick timer is also used by the STM32
HAL to generate precise delays, even if we aren’t using an RTOS. More about
this timer in Chapter 11.

1.1.1.8 Power Modes

The current trend in the electronics industry, especially when it comes to mobile
devices design, is all about power management. Reducing power consumption to
minimum is the main goal of all hardware designers and programmers involved
in the development of battery-powered devices. Cortex-M processors provide
several levels of power management, which can be divided into two main
groups: intrinsic features and user-defined power modes.

With intrinsic features we refer to those native capabilities related to power
consumption defined during the design of both the Cortex-M core and the whole
MCU. For example, Cortex-M0+ cores only define two pipeline stages in order
to reduce power consumption during instructions prefetch. Another native
behavior related to power management is the high code density of the Thumb-2
instruction set, which allows developers to choose MCUs with smaller flash
memory to lower power needs.
Figure 1.10: Cortex-M power
                         consumption at different power modes

Traditionally, Cortex-M processors provide user-defined power modes via
System Control Register (SCR). The first one is the Run mode (see Figure
1.10), which has the CPU running at its full capabilities. In Run mode, power
consumption depends on clock frequency and used peripherals.
Sleep mode is the first low-power mode available to reduce power consumption.
When activated, most functionalities are suspended, CPU frequency is lowered,
and its activities are reduced to those necessary for it to wake up. In Deep sleep
mode all clock signals are stopped, and the CPU needs an external event to wake
up from this state.

However, these power modes are only general models, which are further
implemented in the actual MCU. For example, consider Figure 1.11 displaying
the power consumption of an STM32F2 MCU running at 80MHZ @30°C10. As
we can see, the maximum power consumption is reached in Run-mode with the
ART™ accelerator disabled. Enabling the ART™ accelerator we can save up to
10mAh while also achieving better computing performances. This clearly shows
that the real MCU implementation can introduce different power levels.
Figure 1.11: STM32F2 power
                        consumption at different power modes

STM32Lx families provide several further intermediate power levels, allowing
to precisely select the preferred power mode and hence MCU performance and
power consumption.
We will go in more depth about this topic in Chapter 19.

1.1.1.9 TrustZone™

ARM recently introduced two new Cortex-M processor cores named Cortex-
M23 and Cortex-M33, both based on the ARMv8-M architecture. These new
cores inherit a feature already present on the majority of Cortex-A processors:
the ARM TrustZone™. The TrustZone™ is an optional Security Extension that is
designed to provide a foundation for improved system security in a wide range of
embedded applications. The concept of TrustZone™ technology is not new. The
processor can run in Secure and Non-secure states, with Non-secure software
able to access to Non-secure memory region only. By acting on the memory
mapping configuration, it is possible to define regions of memory address space
where the access to that region (both when executing code and when accessing to
data) is possible just when the processor runs in Secure mode. ARM
TrustZone™ technology enables the system and the software to be partitioned
into Secure and Normal worlds. Secure software can access both Secure and
Non-secure memories and hardware resources, while Normal software can only
access Non-secure memories and resources. These security states are orthogonal
to the existing Thread and Handler modes (more about these two running modes
later in the text), enabling both a Thread and Handler mode in both Secure and
Non-secure states.
ARM TrustZone technology does not cover all aspects of security. For example,
it does not include cryptography. In designs with the ARMv8-M architecture with
TrustZone™, components that are critical to the security of the system can be
placed in the Secure world. For example, these critical components may include:

     A Secure boot loader
     Secret keys
     Flash programming support
     High value assets

The remaining applications are usually placed in the Normal world.

1.1.1.10 CMSIS

One of the key advantages of the ARM platform (both for silicon vendors and
application developers) is the existence of a complete set of development tools
(compilers, run-time libraries, debuggers, and so on) which are reusable across
several vendors.

ARM is also actively working on a way to standardize the software
infrastructure among the MCUs vendors. Cortex Microcontroller Software
Interface Standard (CMSIS) is a vendor-independent hardware abstraction layer
for the Cortex-M processor series and specifies debugger interfaces. The CMSIS
consists of the following components:

     CMSIS-CORE: API for the Cortex-M processor core and peripherals. It
     provides a standardized interface for Cortex-M0/0+/3/4/7/23/33.
     CMSIS-Driver: defines generic peripheral driver interfaces for
     middleware making them reusable across supported devices. The API is
     RTOS independent and connects microcontroller peripherals to middleware
     which implements, amongst other things, communication stacks, file systems
     or graphical user interfaces.
     CMSIS-DSP: DSP Library Collection with over 60 Functions for various
     data types: fixed-point (fractional q7, q15, q31) and single precision
     floating-point (32-bit). The library is available for Cortex-M0, Cortex-M3,
     and Cortex-M4. The Cortex-M4 implementation is optimized for the SIMD
     instruction set.
     CMSIS-RTOS API: Common API for Real-Time Operating Systems. It
     provides a standardized programming interface which is portable to many
     RTOS and therefore enables software templates, middleware, libraries, and
     other components which can work across supported RTOS systems. We will
     talk about this API layer in Chapter 23.
     CMSIS-Pack: describes, using an XML based package description file
     named “PDSC”, the user and device relevant parts of a file collection
     (namely “software pack”) which includes source, header, library files,
     documentation, flash programming algorithms, source code templates and
     example projects. Development tools and web infrastructures use the PDSC
     file to extract device parameters, software components, and evaluation
     board configurations.
     CMSIS-SVD: System View Description (SVD) for Peripherals. Describes
     the peripherals of a device in an XML file and can be used to create
     peripheral awareness in debuggers or header files with peripheral registers
     and interrupt definitions.
     CMSIS-DAP: Debug Access Port. Standardized firmware for a Debug Unit
     that connects to the CoreSight Debug Access Port. CMSIS-DAP is
     distributed as a separate package and well suited for integration on
     evaluation boards.
     CMSIS-NN: Neural Networks. Due to the increase of power computing in
     latest Cortex-M4/7 cores, neural network-based solutions are becoming
     increasingly popular even for embedded machine learning applications.
     CMSIS-NN is a collection of efficient neural network kernels developed to
     maximize the performance and minimize the memory footprint of neural
     networks on Cortex-M processor cores.

However, this initiative from ARM is evolving by its own, and it is mostly
related to the evolving of the ARM Keil tool-chain. The support to all
components from ST is still limited to some APIs, as we will see in following
chapters. The official ST HAL is the main way to develop applications for the
STM32 platform, which presents a lot of peculiarities between MCUs of
different families. Moreover, it is quite clear that the main objective of silicon
vendors is to retain their customers and avoid their migration to other MCUs
platform (even if based on the same ARM Cortex core). So, we are really far
from having a complete and portable layer that works on all ARM based MCUs
available on the market.

1.1.1.11 Effective Implementation of Cortex-M Features in the STM32 Portfolio
Some of the features presented in the previous paragraphs are optional and may
not be available in a given MCU. Tables 1.2 and 3 summarize the Cortex-M
instructions and components available in the STM32 Portfolio. These could be
useful during the selection of an STM32 MCU.

Table 1.2: ARM Cortex-M instruction variations

Table 1.3: ARM Cortex-M optional components

1.2 Introduction to STM32 Microcontrollers
STM32 is a broad range of microcontrollers divided in seventeen sub-families,
each one with its features. ST started the market production of this portfolio in
2007, beginning with the STM32F1 series, which is still in production. Figure
1.12 shows the internal die of an STM32F103 MCU, one of the most widespread
STM32 MCUs11. All STM32 microcontrollers have a Cortex-M core, plus some
distinctive ST features (like the ART™ accelerator). Internally, each
microcontroller consists of the processor core, static RAM, flash memory,
debugging interface, and various other peripherals. Some MCUs provide
additional types of memory (EEPROM, CCM, etc.), and a whole line of devices
targeting low-power applications is continuously growing.
Figure 1.12: Internal die of an STM32F103 MCU

The remaining paragraphs in this chapter will introduce the reader to STM32
microcontrollers, giving a complete overview of all STM32 subfamilies.

1.2.1 Advantages of the STM32 Portfolio….

The STM32 platform provides several advantages for embedded developers.
This paragraph tries to summarize the relevant ones.

    They are Cortex-M based MCUs: this could still not be clear to those of
    you who are new to this platform. Being Cortex-M based microcontrollers
    ensures that you have several tools available on the market to develop your
    applications. ARM has become a sort of standard in the embedded world
    (this is especially true for Cortex-A processors; in the Cortex-M market
    segment there are still several good alternatives: PIC, MSP430, etc.) and
    160 billions of devices sold by 2020 is a strong guarantee that investing on
    this platform is a good choice.
Free ARM based tool-chain: thanks to the diffusion of ARM based
processors, it is possible to work with completely free tool-chains, without
investing a lot of money to start working with this platform, which is
extremely important if you are a hobbyist or a student.
Know-how reuse: STM32 is a quite extensive portfolio, which is based on
a common denominator: their main CPU platform. This ensures, for
example, that know-how acquired working on a given STM32Fx CPU can
easily be applied to other devices from the same family. Moreover, working
with Cortex-M processors allows you to reuse much of the acquired skills if
you (or your purchase team) decide to switch to Cortex-M MCUs from other
vendors (in theory).
Official development environment: ST invested a lot in recent years in
building-up a complete development environment. They made too many
mistakes in the past, by funding several projects around that ended in
nothing. CooCox IDE and SW4STM32 where two previous attempts by ST
to support open-source communities in growing-up a complete tool-chain
for its microcontrollers, but they failed miserably. Finally, ST understood
that this was discouraging a lot of people from adopting the STM32
portfolio, and so they decided to acquire Atollic in order to use their
TrueSTUDIO IDE as the official tool-chain for the STM32 family of
microcontrollers.
Pin-to-pin compatibility: most of STM32 MCUs are designed to be pin-to-
pin compatible inside the extensive STM32 portfolio. This is especially
true for LQFP64-100 packages, and it is a big plus. You will have less
responsibility in the initial choice of the right microcontroller for your
application, knowing that you can eventually jump to another family in case
you find it does not fit your needs.
5V tolerant: Most STM32 pins are 5V tolerant. This means that you can
interface other devices that do not provide 3.3V I/O without using level
shifters (unless speed is key to your application, a level shifter always
introduce a parasitic capacitance that reduced the commutation frequency).
32 cents for 32 bit12: STM32F0 is the right choice if you want to migrate
from 8/16-bit MCUs to a powerful and coherent platform, while keeping a
comparable target price. You can use an RTOS to boost your application
and write much better code.
Integrated bootloader: STM32 MCUs are shipped with an integrated
bootloader, which allows to reprogram the internal flash memory using
some communication peripherals (USART, I²C, etc.). For some of you this
     will not be a killer feature, but it can dramatically simplify the work of
     people developing devices as professionals.

1.2.2 ….And Its Drawbacks

This book is not a brochure, or a document made by marketing people. Nor is the
author an ST employee or is he having business with ST. So, it is right to say that
there are some pitfalls regarding this platform.

     Learning curve: STM32’s learning curve can be quite steep, especially for
     inexperienced users. If you are completely new to embedded development,
     the process of learning how to develop STM32 applications can be
     frustrating. Even if ST is doing a great job at trying to improve the overall
     documentation and the official libraries, it is still hard to deal with this
     platform, and this is a shame. Historically, ST documentation has not been
     the best one for inexperienced people, being too cryptic and lacking clear
     examples.
     Fragmented and dispersive documentation: ST is actively working on
     improving its official documentation for the STM32 platform. You can find
     a lot of huge datasheets on ST’s website, but there is still a lack of good
     documentation especially for its HAL. Recent versions of the CubeHAL
     provide one or more “CHM” files13, which are automatically generated
     from the documentation inside the CubeHAL source code. However, those
     files are not sufficient to start programming with this framework, especially
     if you are new to the STM32 ecosystem and the Cortex-M world.
     Buggy and non-performing HAL: frankly speaking, the official HAL from
     ST improved a lot over the years but it is still evolving, and it is quite
     common to find some severe bugs especially in advanced and less
     widespread modules of the HAL, like it happened to this author with the
     HAL_PCD module (I spent two months to identify a nasty bug affecting the
     USB HAL library on an STM32L052 MCU). ST is actively working on
     fixing the HAL bugs, but it seems we are still far from a “stable release”.
     Moreover, their software release lifecycle is too old and not appropriate for
     the times we live in: bug fixes are released after several months, and
     sometimes the fix bares more issues than the broken code itself. Finally, the
     CubeHAL is far from being considered an optimized library. The HAL is
     designed to be abstracted from the underlying family and the specific MCU
     and this requires that HAL routines are full of if-then-else statement. For
    time-critical applications ST released the CubeHAL-LL library, which is
    essentially a set of macros to simplify the manipulation of peripherals’
    registers. Again, do not forget that you are the pilot and you have to rule all
    those tools.

1.3 A Quick Look at the STM32 Subfamilies

       If you are new to the STM32 world and if you already own an STM32 development kit or a
       custom device that you are impatient to start using, then it is safe to skip this long (and quite tedious
       :-) ) paragraph and to jump to the next one.

As you read, the STM32 is a rather complex product lineup, spanning over
seventeen product sub-families. Figure 1.13 summarizes the current STM32
portfolio. The diagrams aggregate the subfamilies in four macro groups: High-
performance, Mainstream, Ultra Low-Power and Wireless MCUs.

High-performance microcontrollers are those STM32 MCUs dedicated to CPU-
intensive and multimedia applications. They are Cortex-M3/4F/7 based MCUs,
with maximum clock frequencies ranging from 120MHz (F2) up to 550MHz
(H7). Some MCUs in this group provide ART™ Accelerator, an ST technology
that allows 0-wait execution from flash memory.
Figure 1.13: STM32 portfolio

Mainstream MCUs are developed for cost-sensitive applications, where the cost
of the MCU must be even less than 1$/pc and space is a strong constraint. In this
group we can find Cortex-M0/0+/3/4 based MCUs, with maximum clock
frequencies ranging from 48MHz (F0) to over 170MHz (G4).

The Ultra Low-Power group contains those STM32 families of MCUs
addressing low-power applications, used in battery-powered devices which
need to reduce total power consumption to low levels ensuring longer battery
life. In this group we can find both Cortex-M0+ based MCUs, for cost-sensitive
applications, and Cortex-M4F based microcontrollers with Dynamic Voltage
Scaling (DVS), a technology which allows to optimize the internal CPU voltage
according to its frequency. Moreover, ST recently introduced in this category
also MCUs with the new Cortex-M33 core, dedicated to application where
security is a strong constraint. MCUs from this group range from 32MHz Cortex-
M0+ up to 160MHz Cortex-M33.

Wireless MCUs are the brand-new lineup of dual-core STM32 microcontrollers
dedicated to wireless connectivity. They cover Sub-GHz as well as 2.4GHz
frequency range operation. They are easy to use, reliable and perfectly tailored
for a wide range of industrial and consumer applications. These MCUs feature a
Cortex-M0+ core (named Network Processor) dedicated to the radio
management and a user-programmable Cortex-M4 core (named Application
Processor) for the main embedded application. STM32Wx solutions are
compatible with multiple protocols, from point-to-point & mesh to wide-area
networks.

The following paragraphs give a brief description of each STM32 family,
introducing its main features. The most important ones will be summarized inside
tables. Tables were arranged by the author of this book, inspired by the official
ST documentation.

1.3.1 F0

Table 1.4: STM32F0 features

The STM32F0 series is the most cost-effective line of MCU from the STM32
portfolio. It is designed to have a street price able to compete with some 8/16-bit
MCUs from other vendors, offering a more advanced and powerful platform.
The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
          ARM Cortex-M0 core at a maximum clock rate of 48 MHz.
          Cortex-M0 options include the SysTick Timer.
     Memory:
          Static RAM from 4 to 32 KB.
          Flash from 16 to 256 KB.
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
     Peripherals:
          Each F0-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.4 for a quick overview).
     Oscillator source consists of internal RC (8 MHz, 40 kHz), optional
     external HSE (4 to 32 MHz), LSE (32.768 to 1000 kHz).
     IC packages: LQFP, TSSOP2014, UFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table
     1.4 for more about this).
     Operating voltage range is 2.0V to 3.6V with the possibility to go down to
     1.8V ±8%.

1.3.2 F1

Table 1.5: STM32F1 features

The STM32F1 series was the first ARM based MCU from ST. Introduced in the
market in 2007, it is still the most widespread MCU from the STM32 portfolio.
Plenty of development boards are available on the market, produced by ST and
other vendors, and you will find tons of examples on the web for F1
microcontrollers. If you are new to the STM32 world, probably the F1 line is the
best choice to start working with to learn this platform.
The F1-series has evolved over time by increasing speed, size of internal
memory, variety of peripherals. There are five F1 lines: Connectivity
(STM32F105/107), Performance (STM32F103), USB Access (STM32F102),
Access (STM32F101), Value (STM32F100).
The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
          ARM Cortex-M3 core at a maximum clock rate ranging from 24 to 72
          MHz.
     Memory:
          Static RAM from 4 to 96 KB.
          Flash from 16 to 256 KB.
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
     Peripherals:
          Each F1-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.5 for a quick overview).
     Oscillator source consists of internal RC (8 MHz, 40 kHz), optional
     external HSE (4-24MHz(F100), 4-16MHz(F101/2/3), 3-25MHz (F105/7),
     LSE (32.768 - 1000 kHz) ).
     IC packages: LFBGA, LQFP, UFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table 1.5
     for more about this).
     Operating voltage range is 2.0V to 3.6V
     Multiple connectivity options, including Ethernet, CAN and USB 2.0 OTG.

1.3.3 F2

Table 1.6: STM32F2 features

The STM32F2 series of STM32 microcontrollers is the cost-effective solution in
the High-performance segment. It is the most recent and fastest Cortex-M3
based MCU in the STM32 portfolio, with exclusive ART™ Accelerator from
ST. The F2 is pin-to-pin compatible with the STM32 F4-series.

The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
            ARM Cortex-M3 core at a maximum clock rate of 120 MHz.
     Memory:
            Static RAM from 64 to 128 KB.
                  4 KB battery-backed, 80 bytes battery-backed with tamper-
                  detection erase.
            Flash from 128 to 1024 KB.
            Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
            number.
     Peripherals:
            Each F2-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
            line to line (see Table 1.6 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 32 kHz), optional external HSE
     (1 to 26 MHz), LSE (32.768 to 1000 kHz).
     IC packages: BGA, LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.6 for more about
     this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.8V to 3.6V.

1.3.4 F3

Table 1.7: STM32F3 features

The STM32F3 it is based on the ARM Cortex-M4F core and it is one of the two
families dedicated to mixed-signal application. It is designed to be almost pin-
to-pin compatible with the STM32 F1-series, even if it does not offer the same
variety of peripherals. STM32F3 was the MCU chosen by the developers of the
BB-8 droid toy by Sphero.
The distinguishing feature for this series is the presence of integrated analog
peripherals leading to cost reduction at application level and simplifying
application design, including:

     Ultra-fast comparators (25 ns).
     Op-amp with programmable gain.
     12-bit DACs.
     Ultra-fast 12-bit ADCs with 5 MSPS (Million Samples Per Second) per
     channel (up to 18 MSPS in Interleaved mode).
     Precise 16-bit sigma-delta ADCs (21 channels).
     144 MHz Advanced 16-bit pulse-width modulation timer (resolution < 7 ns)
     for control applications; high resolution timer (217 picoseconds), self-
     compensated vs power supply and temperature drift.

Another interesting feature of this series is the presence of a Core Coupled
Memory (CCM), a specific memory architecture which couples some regions of
memory to the CPU core, allowing 0-wait states. This can be used to boost time-
critical routines, improving performance by up to 40%. For example, OS
routines for context switching can be stored in this area to speed up RTOS
activities.
The most important features of this series are:

Figure 1.14: The BB-
                                8 droid made with an
                                   STM32F3 MCU

     Core:
         ARM Cortex-M4F core at a maximum clock rate of 72 MHz.
    Memory:
          Static RAM from 16 to 80 KB general-purpose with hardware parity
          check.
                64 / 128 bytes battery-backed with tamper-detection erase.
          Up to 8 KB Core Coupled Memory (CCM) with hardware parity
          check.
          Flash from 32 to 512 KB.
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
    Peripherals:
          Each F3-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.7 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (8 MHz, 40 kHz), optional external HSE
    (4 to 32 MHz), LSE (32.768 to 1000 kHz).
    IC packages: LQFP, UFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table 1.7 for more
    about this). Operating voltage range is 1.8V ±8%. to 3.6V.

1.3.5 F4
Table 1.8: STM32F4 features

The STM32F4 series is the most widespread group of Cortex-M4F based MCUs
in the High-performance segment. The F4-series is also the first STM32 series
to have DSP and Floating Point SP instructions. The F4 is pin-to-pin compatible
with the STM32 F2-series and adds higher clock speed, 64K CCM static RAM,
full duplex I²S, improved real-time clock, and faster ADCs. The STM32F4-
series is also targeted to multimedia applications, and some MCUs offer
dedicated support for LCD-TFT and extendable memory with flexible memory
controller (FMC) and a Dual-mode Quad-SPI interface.
The most important features of this series are:

    Core:
        ARM Cortex-M4F core at a maximum clock ranging from 84 to 180
        MHz.
    Memory:
        Static RAM from 128 to 384 KB.
                4 KB battery-backed, 80 bytes battery-backed with tamper-
                detection erase.
          64 KB Core Coupled Memory (CCM).
          Flash from 256 to 2048 KB.
          Easily extendable memory range with flexible memory controller
          (FMC) and a Dual-mode Quad-SPI interface. The FMC runs at 90
          MHz with a 32-bit parallel interface, and supporting Compact Flash,
          SRAM, PSRAM, NOR, NAND and SDRAM memories. The Dual-
          mode Quad-SPI running at 90 MHz enables cost-effective NOR Flash
          and supports memory-mapped mode.
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
    Peripherals:
          Each F4-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.8 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 32 kHz), optional external HSE
    (4 to 26 MHz), LSE (32.768 to 1000 kHz).
    IC packages: BGA, LQFP, TFBGA, UFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table
    1.8 for more about this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.8V to 3.6V.

1.3.6 F7
Table 1.9: STM32F7 features

The STM32F7 series is the latest ultra-performance MCU in the High-
performance segment, and it was the first Cortex-M7 based MCU introduced on
the market. Thanks to ST’s ART™ Accelerator as well as an L1 cache,
STM32F7 devices deliver the maximum theoretical performance of the Cortex-
M7 regardless of code being executed from embedded flash or external memory:
1082 CoreMark/462 DMIPS at 216 MHz. STM32F7 is clearly targeted to heavy
multimedia embedded applications. Thanks to the STM32 longevity program (10
years) it is possible to develop powerful embedded applications without
worrying about the MCU availability on the market in the far future. Cortex-M7
is backwards compatible with the Cortex-M4 instruction set, and STM32F7
series is pin-to-pin compatible with the STM32F4 series.

The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
         ARM Cortex-M7 core at a maximum clock of 216 MHz.
     Memory:
         Static RAM with scattered architecture:
              Up to 512 Kbytes of universal data memory, including up to 128
              Kbytes of Tightly-Coupled Memory for Data (DTCM) for time
                critical data handling (stack, heap…)
                16 Kbytes of Tightly-Coupled Memory for Instructions (ITCM)
                for time-critical routines
                4 Kbytes of backup SRAM to keep data in the lowest power
                modes
          L1 cache (I/D up to 16 KB + 16 KB).
          Flash from 512 to 2048 KB.
          Easily extendable memory range with flexible memory controller
          (FMC) and a Dual-mode Quad-SPI interface. The FMC runs at 90
          MHz with a 32-bit parallel interface, and supporting Compact Flash,
          SRAM, PSRAM, NOR, NAND and SDRAM memories. The Dual-
          mode Quad-SPI running at 90 MHz enables cost-effective NOR Flash
          and supports memory-mapped mode.
          Two general-purpose DMA controllers and dedicated DMA
          controllers for Ethernet (on some variants), high-speed USB On-The-
          Go interfaces and the Chrom-ART™ graphic accelerator (on some
          variants)
          Peripheral speed is independent from CPU speed (dual clock support)
          allowing system clock changes without any impact on peripheral
          operations
          Protected code execution feature (PC-ROP) on some variants
          On-chip USB high-speed PHY on some variants
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
    Peripherals:
          Each F7-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.9 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 32 kHz), optional external HSE
    (4 to 26 MHz), LSE (32.768 to 1000 kHz).
    IC packages: LQFP, TFBGA, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.9 for more
    about this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.

1.3.7 H7
Table 1.10: STM32H7 features

ST released on the market in 2017 this family of single-core Cortex-M7 and
dual-core Cortex-M7 and Cortex-M4 microcontrollers, made with a 40nm
process able to run up to 550MHz for single-core MCUs. It also provides up to
1MB SRAM with the same scattered architecture found in the STM32F7-series.

The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
         ARM Cortex-M7 core at a maximum clock of 550 MHz for single-core
         MCUs and ARM Cortex-M7 at a maximum clock of 480 MHz plus
         ARM Cortex-M4 cores at a maximum clock of 240 MHz for dual-core
         MCUs.
     Memory:
         Static RAM up to 1024 KB with scattered architecture:
              192 Kbytes of TCM RAM (including 64 Kbytes of ITCM RAM
              and 128 Kbytes of DTCM RAM for time-critical routines and
              data), 512 Kbytes, 288 Kbytes and 64 Kbytes of user SRAM, and
              4 Kbytes of SRAM in backup domain to keep data in the lowest
              power modes
         L1 cache (I/D up to 16 KB + 16 KB).
         Flash from 512 to 2048 KB.
         Easily extendable memory range with flexible memory controller
         (FMC) and a Dual-mode Quad-SPI interface. The FMC runs at 90
         MHz with a 32-bit parallel interface, and supporting Compact Flash,
         SRAM, PSRAM, NOR, NAND and SDRAM memories. The Dual-
         mode Quad-SPI running at 90 MHz enables cost-effective NOR Flash
         and supports memory-mapped mode.
         A high-speed master direct memory access (MDMA) controller, two
         dual-port DMAs with FIFO and request router capabilities for optimal
         peripheral management, and one additional DMA
         Chrom-ART Accelerator™ for efficient 2D image copy and double-
         precision FPU are also part of the acceleration features available. A
         MIPI-DSI physical layer to drive high-resolution displays is also
         available on certain devices.
         Thanks to dual-clock support, the speed of peripherals is independent
         from the CPU’s speed, allowing system clock changes without any
         impact on peripheral operations
         Even more peripherals, such as four serial audio interfaces (SAI) with
         SPDIF output support, three full-duplex I²S interfaces, a SPDIF input
         interface supporting four inputs, two USB OTG with dedicated power
         supply and Dual-mode Quad-SPI interface, two FD-CAN controllers,
         a high-resolution timer, a TFT-LCD controller, a JPEG codec, two
         SDIO interfaces and many other analog peripherals including three fast
         16-bit ADCs, two comparators and two operational amplifiers.
         The Secure Firmware Install and Secure Boot – Secure Firmware
         Upgrade allow the user to perform the initial programming of the
         device in a secured manner, or to perform a secured field upgrade of
         the code.
         Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
         number.
    Peripherals:
         Several new peripherals such as 14-bit ADC and a new SAI.
    IC packages: LQFP, TFBGA, UFBGA, WLCSP
    Pin-to-pin compatible with the STM32F7-series.

This book does not cover the STM32H7 series.

1.3.8 L0
Table 1.11: STM32L0 features

The STM32L0 series is the cost-effective solution of the Ultra Low-Power
segment. The combination of an ARM Cortex-M0+ core and ultra-low-power
features makes STM32L0 the best fit for applications operating on battery or
powered by energy harvesting, offering the world’s lowest power consumption at
125°C. The STM32L0 offers dynamic voltage scaling, an ultra-low-power clock
oscillator, LCD interface, comparator, DAC and hardware encryption. Current
consumption reference values:

     Dynamic run mode: down to 49μA/MHz.
     Ultra-low-power mode + full RAM + low power timer: 340 nA (16
     wakeup lines).
     Ultra-low-power mode + backup register: 230 nA (3 wakeup lines).
     Wake-up time: 3.5 µs.

The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
          ARM Cortex-M0+ core at a maximum clock rate of 32 MHz.
     Memory:
          Static RAM up to 20 KB.
               20-byte battery-backed with tamper-detection erase.
          Flash from 32 to 192 KB.
          EEPROM up to 6 KB (with ECC).
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
     Peripherals:
          Each L0-series features a range of peripherals which vary from line to
          line (see Table 1.11 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
    (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
    IC packages are LQFP, TFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table 1.11 for
    more about this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.65V to 3.6V.

1.3.9 L1

Table 1.12: STM32L1 features

The STM32L1 series is the mid-range solution of the Ultra Low-Power segment.
The combination of an ARM Cortex-M3 core with FPU and ultra-low-power
features makes the STM32L1 optimal for applications operating on battery that
also demand sufficient computing power. Like the L0-series, The STM32L1
offers dynamic voltage scaling, an ultra-low-power clock oscillator, LCD
interface, comparator, DAC and hardware encryption.
Current consumption reference values:

    Ultra-low-power mode: 280 nA with backup registers (3 wakeup pins)
    Ultra-low-power mode + RTC: 900 nA with backup registers (3 wakeup
    pins)
    Low-power run mode: down to 9 μA
    Dynamic run mode: down to 177 μA/MHz

STM32L1 is pin-to-pin compatible with several MCU from the STM32F series.
The most important features of this series are:
    Core:
          ARM Cortex-M3 core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 32 MHz.
    Memory:
          Static RAM from 4 to 80 KB.
                20 bytes battery-backed with tamper-detection erase.
          Flash from 32 to 512 KB.
          EEPROM up to 2 KB (with ECC).
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
    Peripherals:
          Each L1 series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
          line to line (see Table 1.12 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
    (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
    IC packages are LQFP, TFBGA, UFBGA, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table
    1.12 for more about this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.65V to 3.6V, including a programmable
    brownout detector.

1.3.10 L4
Table 1.13: STM32L4 features

The STM32L4 series is one of the best-in-class MCU series in the Ultra Low-
Power segment. The combination of an ARM Cortex-M4 core with FPU and
ultra-low-power features, makes the STM32L4 the best fit for applications
demanding high performance while operating on battery or powered by energy
harvesting. Like the L1-series, The STM32L4 offers dynamic voltage scaling and
an ultra-low-power clock oscillator.
Current consumption reference values:

    Ultra-low-power mode: 8 nA with backup registers without RTC.
    Ultra-low-power mode + RTC: 200 nA with backup registers (5 wakeup
    lines).
    Ultra-low-power mode + 8 Kbytes of RAM: 195 nA.
    Ultra-low-power mode + 8 Kbytes of RAM + RTC: 340 nA.
    Dynamic run mode: down to 28 μA/MHz.
    Wake-up time: 5 μs.

STM32L4 is pin-to-pin compatible with several MCU from the STM32F series.
The most important features of this series are:

    Core:
        ARM Cortex-M4F core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 80 MHz.
     Memory:
            Static RAM up to 320 KB.
                  20 bytes battery-backed with tamper-detection erase.
            Flash sizes from 256 to 1024 KB.
            Support to SDMMC and FSMC interfaces.
            Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
            number.
     Peripherals:
            Each L4-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
            line to line (see Table 1.13 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
     (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
     IC packages are LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.13 for more about
     this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.

1.3.11 L4+

Table 1.14: STM32L4+ features

The STM32L4+ series, introduced on the market at the end of 2017, is the new
best-in-class MCU series in the Ultra Low-Power segment. The STM32L4+
series shatters processing capabilities limits in the ultra‐low‐power world by
delivering 150 DMIPS/409 CoreMark score while executing from internal Flash
memory and by embedding 640 Kbytes SRAM enabling more advanced
consumer, medical and industrial low-power applications and devices.
STM32L4+ microcontrollers offer dynamic voltage scaling to balance power
consumption with processing demand, low‐power peripherals (LP UART, LP
timers) available in Stop mode, safety and security features, smart and numerous
peripherals, advanced and low‐power analog peripherals such as op amps,
comparators, 12‐bit DACs and 16‐bit ADC (hardware oversampling). The new
STM32L4+ series also embeds advanced graphic features enabling state‐of‐the‐
art graphic user interfaces. The Chrom‐ART Accelerator™, ST’s proprietary 2D
hardware graphic accelerator, efficiently handles repetitive graphic operations
releasing the main CPU capabilities for real time processing or even more
advanced graphic operations. The Chrom‐ART Accelerator is coupled with the
large embedded SRAM, the Chrom‐GRC™ round display memory optimizer, the
high-throughput Octo-SPI interface and to the advanced TFT and DSI controllers,
allowing you to achieve ‘smartphone‐like’ graphic user interfaces in a single‐
chip and an ultra‐low power solution.

Current consumption reference values:

     Ultra-low-power mode: 20 nA with backup registers without RTC.
     Ultra-low-power mode + RTC: 200 nA with backup registers (5 wakeup
     lines).
     Ultra-low-power mode + 64 Kbytes of RAM: 800 nA.
     Ultra-low-power mode + 64 Kbytes of RAM + RTC: 1 μA.
     Dynamic run mode: down to 43 μA/MHz.
     Wake-up time: 5 μs.

STM32L4+ is pin-to-pin compatible with several MCU from the STM32F
series. The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
         ARM Cortex-M4F core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 120
         MHz.
     Memory:
         Static RAM up to 640 KB.
              64 bytes battery-backed with tamper-detection erase.
         Flash sizes from 1024 to 2048 KB.
         Support to SDMMC and FSMC interfaces.
           Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
           number.
    Peripherals:
           Each L4+-series device features a range of peripherals which vary
           from line to line (see Table 1.14 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
    (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
    IC packages are LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.14 for more about
    this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.

1.3.12 L5

In 2018 ST announced the first STM32 family based on the new Cortex-M33
core. STM32L5 comes with a variety of security features, such as TrustZone™,
Secure Boot, active IO tamper detection, Secure Firmware Install loader,
certified cryptolib etc. According to STM view, STM32L5 family is addressed
to IoT devices where security has emerged as one of the 3 key areas that
developers of embedded and IoT applications are thriving to improve. The
STM32L5 microcontroller series is the solution and provide a new optimal
balance between performance, power and security.

Offering up to 512 Kbytes of flash (dual bank) memory and 256 Kbytes of
SRAM, the STM32L5 series of microcontrollers reaches an upgraded level of
performance (443 CoreMark) thanks to this new core and a new ST ART
Accelerator™ (supporting now also external memory). The STM32L5 offers a
large portfolio with 7 packages (from 48 to 144 pins) and supports up to 125°C
ambient temperature. The most important features of this series are:

    Core:
        ARM Cortex-M33 core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 110
        MHz.
    Memory:
        Static RAM up to 256 KB.
        Flash sizes from 256 to 512 KB.
        Support to SDMMC and Octa-SPI interfaces.
        Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
        number.
     Peripherals:
            Each L5-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
            line to line (see Table 1.15 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
     (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
     IC packages are LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.15 for more about
     this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.71V to 3.6V.

Table 1.15: STM32L5 features

1.3.13 U5

In 2021 ST announced an important evolution to the low-power portfolio
introducing the STM32U5 family, where the “U” stands for Ultra low-power.
Based on Cortex®-M33, STM32U5 meets the most demanding
power/performance requirements for smart applications, including wearables,
personal medical devices, home automation, and industrial sensors. Offering up
to 2 Mbytes of Flash (dual bank) memory and 786 Kbytes of SRAM, the
STM32U5 series of microcontrollers takes performance to the next level.

The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
         ARM Cortex-M33 core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 160
         MHz.
     Memory:
         Static RAM up to 786 KB.
           Flash sizes up to 2048 KB.
           Support to SDMMC, FSMC and Octa-SPI interfaces.
           Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
           number.
    Peripherals:
           Each L5-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from
           line to line (see Table 1.16 for a quick overview).
    Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
    (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
    IC packages are LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP (see Table 1.16 for more about
    this).
    Operating voltage range is 1.71V to 3.6V.
    Embedded SMPS (Switched-Mode Power Supply) step-down converter to
    improve power management.
    Low Power Background Autonomous Mode (LPBAM), an innovative
    autonomous power mode, saves power by enabling direct memory access
    Low Power Direct Memory Access (LPDMA) and ensuring the peripherals
    keep working, while most of the device is in stop mode.
    Key performance indicators include:
           110 nA in shutdown mode.
           300 nA in standby mode.
           1.7 µA in stop mode 3 with 16 Kbytes of SRAM.
           6.6 µA in stop mode 2 with 786 Kbytes of SRAM.
           Down to 19 µA/MHz in active mode.

Table 1.16: STM32U5 features

1.3.14 G0
Table 1.17: STM32G0 features

In 2019 ST introduced on the market what it is essentially a modern replacement
for the STM32F0 series: the STM32G0 family. This new series is based on a
90nm lithographic process, instead of the quite old 180nm process used for the
STM32F0 family. This means less space needed for the same peripherals,
smaller packages, lower costs at higher volumes due to the less demand in
silicon, less power consumption. Traditionally, STM32 MCUs came in larger
packages, compared to other Cortex-M manufacturers that offer even smaller
packages like the SO-8 one. Now ST finally fixes this gap, allowing to reduce
the PCB space and design. In fact, instead of having the traditional multiple
power lines and their necessary decoupling capacitors, the STM32G0 uses only
one line, which will make the PCB design a lot simpler and cheaper. This also
means that some STM32G0 MCUs offer nine more I/Os than the corresponding
STM32F0 MCUs that have a similar pin count. Moreover, a multi-bonding
approach is used on STM32G03X and STM32G04X MCUs with small packages
(SO8, TSSOP20) in order to offer a maximum of alternate functions and analog
inputs. This approach results in multiple die pads connected internally to a single
package pin.

This new generation offers a Cortex-M0+ core at 64 MHz as well as a Securable
Memory Area, more RAM and Flash, more I/Os, and a more extensive
integration of components to simplify the overall PCB design significantly. 32
pins and 48 pins models go from the simplest configuration with 8 KB of RAM
and 16 KB of Flash to most powerful 128 KB RAM / 512 KB Flash architecture.
The adoption of a Cortex-M0+ core will facilitate application programming is
the low power modes. Despite being a mainstream device, the STM32G0
requires less than 100 µA / MHz when running at 64 MHz, thanks to its 90nm
process that has some similarities with the STM32L4. Comparatively, the
STM32F0 requires 250 µA / MHz. The new architecture also has a STOP mode
that can go as low as 3 µA with only the Flash and Real-Time Clock off, while
its STANDBY mode just demands 200 nA, which is drastically less than anything
on the previous generation. Despite such a low power state, the architecture can
still wake up in about 5 µs in STOP and 14 µs in STANDBY, making them even
more advantageous.

Additionally, STM32G0 offers a VBAT pin, which means that engineers can put
a capacitor to only power the RTC and backup registers, which allows the rest of
the system to shut down and drops the power consumption to 10 nA. With such a
low consumption, it is possible to create a design that keeps basic information in
memory while the user replaces a battery, for instance, thus improving the
overall experience.

Finally, STM32G0 includes a crypto-core capable of accelerating AES 256 bit
computations, as well as a True Random Number Generator (TRNG) to
optimize cryptographic keys. However, the most interesting security feature is the
implementation of a programmable securable memory area. Developers can
define a portion of the Flash that will be inaccessible from the rest of the system
once they log out of it, which enables them to store root keys and critical routines
to implement features such as Secure Boot and Secure Firmware Upgrade.

STM32G0 is pin-to-pin compatible with a lot of MCU from the STM32F0
series. The most important features of this series are:

     Core:
           ARM Cortex-M0+ core with MPU at a maximum clock rate of 64
           MHz.
     Memory:
           Static RAM up to 128 KB.
           Flash sizes from 16 to 512 KB.
           Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
           number.
     Peripherals:
           Each G0-series features a range of peripherals which vary from line to
           line (see Table 1.17 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
     (1 to 48 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
     IC packages are LQFP, TSSOP, SO-8, UFQFPN, WLCSP (see Table 1.11
     for more about this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.
1.3.15 G4

In 2019, ST also announced a new series that combines the performance of the
STM32F4 family with some of the distinctive features of the STM32F3 series:
STM32G4. The STM32G4 is the first is dedicated to the “mixed-signal”
segment, since it is the first STM32 to include five analog-to-digital converters,
seven digital-to-analog converters, six operational amplifiers, and seven
comparators, while also integrating a USB-C Power Delivery controller, a 184
picoseconds high-resolution timer, CAN interfaces with flexible data rate, and
math units accelerating certain trigonometric functions. Its Cortex-M4 core will
reach up to 170 MHz to obtain 213 DMIPS, and 550 points in CoreMark while
its numerous architectural improvements enable the creation of simpler yet more
robust designs.

Table 1.18: STM32G4 features

The STM32G4 is the first STM32 with two math accelerators, one for
trigonometric calculations (named by ST COordinate Rotation DIgital
Computer or CORDIC) and the other for filtering functions (named by ST Filter
Mathematical ACcelerator or FMAC). Very simply, the CORDIC accelerator
provides hardware acceleration for the trigonometric functions often present in
motor control, metering, signal processing, and many other applications. On the
other hand, the FMAC enables the implementation of two major primary filters in
signal processing: the finite impulse response (FIR) and infinite impulse
response (IIR) digital filters. The STM32G4 series is also the first ST MCU
architecture to include a timer with a resolution below 200 picoseconds. Its first
and most obvious benefit is its ability to drive a highly precise power supply in
LLC resonant topologies. The timer also offers a highly flexible pulse-width
modulation (PWM) thanks to the presence of seven timebases that developers
can combine to obtain very granular modulations. The high-resolution timer also
benefits from an event handler to help engineers more easily configure and call
the timer or use it to generate interrupts, for example.

The STM32G47x MCUs also have a critical feature in the form of a dual bank
flash, like in some STM32F4 and in all STM32F7/H7 series. Very simply, the
MCU organizes the flash memory in two physical banks with Read While Write
(RWW) capability. As a result, it becomes possible to download, install, then
run a new firmware without any interruptions. The system runs on one bank while
the other receives the new firmware. The system can then hot swap the bank and
seamlessly switch to the second one to run the new code. Developers can even
secure the download operation by using new security features available on the
STM32G4 like the securable memory area: a section of memory that can store
secret keys or execute software routines and that only runs once after reset before
becoming invisible to the user code. Moreover, the STM32G4 also borrows
other features available in the STM32F3, like the Core Coupled Memory (CCM)
described later in the book.

     Core:
          ARM Cortex-M4F core with MPU at a maximum clock rate of 170
          MHz.
     Memory:
          Static RAM up to 128 KB.
          Flash sizes from 32 to 512 KB.
          Rich advanced analog peripherals (comparator, op-amps, DAC)
          ADC with hardware oversampling (16-bit resolution)
          Dual-bank Flash memory with error-correcting code (ECC) (supports
          in-field firmware upgrades)
          Securable memory area
          High-resolution timerUSB Type-C interface with Power Delivery
          including physical layer (PHY)
          AES hardware encryption
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
     Peripherals:
          Each G0-series features a range of peripherals which vary from line to
          line (see Table 1.17 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of internal RC (16 MHz, 37 kHz), optional external HSE
     (1 to 48 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
     IC packages are LQFP, UFBGA, WLCSP, UQFN (see Table 1.18 for more
     about this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.71V to 3.6V.

1.3.16 STM32WB

Table 1.19: STM32WB features

The STM32WB series, introduced on the market at the beginning of 2018, is the
MCU series in the 2.4GHz Wireless segment. STM32WB is a lineup of dual-core
STM32 microcontrollers with integrated 2.4GHz radio fronted suitable for
wireless and Bluetooth 5.x applications. These MCUs feature a Cortex-M0+
core running at 32 MHz (named Network Processor) dedicated to the radio
management (a companion BLE 5.0 stack is also provided by ST) and a user-
programmable Cortex-M4 core running at 64 MHz (named Application
Processor) for the main embedded application.

The STM32WB platform is an evolution of the STM32L4 Ultra Low‑Power
series of MCUs. It provides the same digital and analog peripherals suitable for
applications requiring extended battery life and complex functionalities.
STM32WB integrate several communication peripherals, a convenient crystal-
less USB2.0 FS interface, audio support, an LCD driver, up to 72 GPIOs, an
integrated SMPS for power consumption optimization and multiple low-power
modes to maximize battery life.
On top of wireless and low‐power features, a particular focus was placed on
embedding security hardware functions such as a 256‐bit AES, PCROP, JTAG
Fuse, PKA (elliptic curve encryption engine), and Root Secure Services (RSS).
The RSS allows authenticating OTA communications, regardless of the radio
stack or application.

The STM32WB55 is a Bluetooth 5.2 certified device, and it offers Mesh 1.0
software support, multiple profiles and flexibility to integrate proprietary BLE
stacks. OpenThread-certified software stack is also available. The radio can
also run BLE/OpenThread protocols concurrently. The embedded generic MAC
allows the usage of other IEEE 802.15.4 proprietary stacks like ZigBee®, or
proprietary protocols, giving even more options for connecting devices to the
Internet of Things (IoT).

     Core:
          ARM Cortex-M4F core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 64 MHz
          (Application Processor). * ARM Cortex-M0+ core a maximum clock
          rate of 32 MHz (Network Processor).
     Memory:
          Static RAM up to 256 KB.
          Flash sizes up to 1024 KB.
          Support to Quad-SPI interface.
          Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device identifier
          number.
     Radio:
          BLE 5.0 compatible radio front-end and stack.
          IEEE 802.15.4 compatible radio front-end.
          Over-The-Air Firmware upgradability.
          Support for an external Power Amplifier.
     Peripherals:
          Each WB-series device features a range of peripherals which vary
          from line to line (see Table 1.19 for a quick overview).
     Oscillators consist of several internal RC (16 MHz, 32 kHz), optional
     external HSE (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
     IC packages are WLCSP, UFQFPN, VFQFPN (see Table 1.19 for more
     about this).
     Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.
1.3.17 STM32WL

Table 1.20: STM32WL features

The STM32WL family was introduced in 2020 and it a sub-GHz radio. Built on
Cortex‐M4 and Cortex-M0+ cores (single- and dual-core architectures
available), STM32WL microcontrollers support multiple modulations: LoRa,
(G)FSK, (G)MSK, BPSK to ensure flexibility in wireless applications with
LoRaWAN, Sigfox, W-MBUS, mioty or any other suitable protocol in a fully
open way. STM32WL microcontrollers feature a sub-GHz radio based-on
Semtech SX126x to meet the requirements of a wide range of Low-Power Wide
Area Network (LPWAN) wireless applications in industrial and consumer
Internet-of-Things (IoT). The radio is suitable for systems targeting compliance
with radio regulations including, but not limited to, ETSI EN 300 220, FCC CFR
47 Part 15, China regulatory requirements and the Japanese ARIB T-108.
Continuous frequency coverage from 150 to 960 MHz enables the support of all
major sub-GHz ISM bands around the world.

Core: * ARM Cortex-M4F core with FPU at a maximum clock rate of 48 MHz
(Application Processor). * ARM Cortex-M0+ core a maximum clock rate of 32
MHz (Network Processor). * Memory: * Static RAM up to 64 KB. * Flash sizes
up to 256 KB. * Each chip has a factory-programmed 96-bit unique device
identifier number. * Radio: * 150 to 960 MHz radio front-end. * LoRa, (G)FSK,
(G)MSK, BPSK compatible modulations. * Dual-output power to balance
between long-rage, battery life and regulatory compliance. * Peripherals: * Each
WB-series device features a range of peripherals which vary from line to line
(see Table 1.20 for a quick overview). * Oscillators consist of several internal
RC (16 MHz, 32 kHz), optional external HSE (1 to 24 MHz), LSE (32.768kHz).
* IC packages are WLCSP, UFQFPN, VFQFPN (see Table 1.20 for more about
this). * Operating voltage range is 1.7V to 3.6V.

1.3.18 How to Select the Right MCU for You?

Selecting a microcontroller for a new project is never a trivial task, unless you
are reusing a previous design. First of all, there are tens of MCU manufacturers
on the market, each one with its market share and audience. ST, Microchip, TI,
Atmel, Renesas, NXP and so on15. In our case we are very lucky: we have
already picked a brand.
As we have seen in the previous paragraphs, the STM32 is really an extensive
portfolio. We can choose an MCU from more than 1200 devices (if we also
consider package variants). So, where to start?

In an ideal world, the first step of the selection process involves the
understanding of needed computing power. If we are going to develop a CPU
intensive application, focused on multimedia and graphic applications, then we
have to shift our attention to the High-Performance group of STM32
microcontrollers. If, on the other hand, the computing power is not the main
requirement of our electronic device, we can focus on the Mainstream segment,
giving a close look at the STM32F1 series which offers the most extensive
selection to choose from.

The next step is about connectivity requirements. If we need to interact with the
external world through an Ethernet connection or other industrial protocols such
as a CAN bus, and our application has to be responsive and able to deal with
several Internet Protocols, then the STM32F4 portfolio is probably your best
option; otherwise, the STM32F105/7 connectivity line is a better choice.

If we are going to develop a battery-powered device (maybe the new bestseller
on the wearable market), then we have to look at the STM32L selection,
choosing amongst the various sub-families according to the computing power we
need.

As stated at the beginning of this paragraph, this is the selection process as it
happens in an ideal world. But what about the real world? In the everyday
development process, we probably have to answer the following questions
before we begin selecting the right MCU for our project:

    Is this device targeted for mass-market or a niche?
    If you are developing a device that will be produced in small quantities,
    then the price difference amongst the STM32 microcontrollers will not
    affect your project too much. You may also consider the brand new
    STM32F7 and put little attention to software optimization (when dealing
    with low performance MCUs you have to do your best to optimize your
    code - keep in mind that this is also a cost which increases the final
    investment). On the other hand, if you are going to build a mass-market
    device, then the price of a single IC is really important: how much you will
    save during production often outweighs the initial investment.
    What is the allowed budget for the total BOM?
    This is a corollary to the previous point. If you already have the target price
    of your board, then you must carefully select the right MCU in the early
    stages.
    What about space constraints? Does your board have to fit the latest
    wearable device, or do you have sufficient room to use the IC package you
    prefer? The answer to this question deeply affects the selection process of
    an MCU and what we can demand of it in terms of performance and
    peripherals capabilities.
    Which production technology can my company afford?
    This is another non-trivial question. LQFP packages are still really popular
    in the MCU market thanks to the fact that they do not require complex
    production costs and they can be easily assembled even on old production
    lines. BGA and WLCSP packages require X-Ray inspection equipment and
    could affect your selection process.
    Is time-to-market critical for you?
    Time-to-market is always a key factor for anybody doing business, but
    sometimes you are required to have a firmware ready the day before you
    start the development process. This could lead to non-optimized firmware,
    at least at an early stage. This means that probably an MCU with more
    computing power is the best choice for you.
    Can you reuse board layouts or code?
    Every embedded developer has a portfolio of libraries and well-known
    ICs. Software development is a complex task which involves several stages
    before we can consider our firmware stable and ready for production.
    Sometimes (this is happening really frequently nowadays), you have to deal
     with undocumented hardware bugs or, at least, with their unpredictable
     behavior. This implies that you have to be really careful in deciding to
     switch to another architecture or even another MCU in the same series.
     Is the candidate MCU available?
     Well, in 2022 this is not a trivial question. Thanks to the global silicon
     shortage crisis, almost all silicon vendors have lead-times that span
     between 8 months and 2 years. And this is dramatically true for STM. A
     friend of mine, to meet a project deadline, had to buy 200 Nucleo and
     Discovery boards to desolder an STM32F1 MCU in order to deliver 200
     custom boards. And now all distributors for electronic components (RS,
     Farnell, etc.) are placing caps on the maximum number of development
     boards a company can buy. So, before starting design a new product on an
     STM32 MCU, I strongly suggest buying the wanted MCU and keep the
     material in stock before even opening the IDE.

One of the key features of the STM32 platform could help a lot during the
selection process: the pin-to-pin compatibility. This allows you to choose a more
powerful (or cheaper) MCU during the selection process, giving you the freedom
to change it at a more advanced development stage. For example, for a recent
board I have developed, I started by choosing an STM32F1 MCU, but I
downgraded it to a cheaper STM32F0 when I reached the conclusion that it
would satisfy my requirements. However, keep in mind that this process always
involves adapting the code to the different sub-family.
Figure 1.15: The MCU Finder tool for desktop

ST offers two convenient tools to help you in the MCU selection process. The
first one is the STM32 and STM8 MCU Finder for Windows, Mac and Linux
(see Figure 1.15) and its available on the ST website. Before installing it, be
patient: as we will see later, this tool is already integrated in the
STM32CubeIDE tool-chain. So, there is no need to eat space on your PC.
Figure 1.16: The
                                 MCU Finder App
                                  for Android OS

The second tool is a useful mobile app (see Figure 1.16) available for iOS and
Android.

1.4 The Nucleo Development Board
Every practical text about an electronic device requires a development board
(also known as kit) to start working with it. In the STM32 world the most
widespread development board is the STM32 Discovery. ST has developed
more than 48 different discovery boards useful to test STM32 MCUs and their
capabilities.

Figure 1.17: The STM32L0538
                          Discovery kit introduced by ST in
                                        2015

For example, the STM32L0538DISCOVERY board (Figure 1.17) allows to test
both the STM32L053 MCU and an e-paper display. You can find a lot of tutorials
around the Internet covering boards from the Discovery line.
ST introduced in 2015 a completely new range of development boards: the
Nucleo. The Nucleo line-up is divided in three main groups: Nucleo-32, Nucleo-
64 and Nucleo-144 (see Figure 1.18). The name of each group comes from the
MCU package type used: Nucleo-32 uses an STM32 in an LQFP-32 package;
Nucleo-64 uses an LQFP-64; Nucleo-144 an LQFP-144. The Nucleo-64 was the
first line introduced to the market and there are currently 32 different boards,
each one with a given STM32 microcontroller. The Nucleo-144 has been
introduced in January 2016, and it is the first low-cost kit equipping the powerful
STM32F746. It also provides an Ethernet phyther16 and a LAN port. Since the
Nucleo-64 is the most complete range, this book will cover only the most
relevant boards from the Nucleo-64 line-up (see Table 1.21 for the complete
list). In the remaining parts of this book, we refer to the Nucleo-64 simply with
the term “Nucleo”.

The Nucleo is composed of two parts, as shown in Figure 1.19. The part with
the mini-USB connector is an ST-LINK 2.1 integrated debugger, which is used to
upload the firmware on the target MCU and to do step-by-step debugging. The
ST-LINK interface also provides a Virtual COM Port (VCP), which can be used
to exchange data and messages with the host PC. One key feature of Nucleo
boards is that the ST-LINK interface can be easily separated from the rest of the
board (two red scissors in Figure 1.19 show where to break). This way it can be
used as stand-alone ST-LINK programmer (a stand-alone ST-LINK programmer
cost about $25). However, the ST-LINK provides an optional SWD interface that
can be used to program another board without detaching the ST-LINK interface
from the Nucleo (as it already happens with the Discovery boards) by removing
the two jumpers labeled ST-LINK. The rest of the board contains the target MCU
(the microcontroller we will use to develop our applications), a RESET button
(the black one), a user programmable tactile button (the blue one) and an LED.
The board also contains one pad to mount an external high-speed crystal (HSE).
All recent Nucleo boards already provide a low-speed crystal. Finally, the board
has several pin headers we will look at in a while.
Figure 1.18: A Nucleo development board

ST introduced this new kit to attract people from the Arduino world. In fact,
Nucleo boards provide pin headers to accept Arduino shields, expansion boards
specifically built to expand the Arduino UNO and all other Arduino boards.
Figure 1.2017 shows the STM32 peripherals and GPIOs associated with the
Arduino compatible connector.

Figure 1.19: The relevant parts of a Nucleo board

To be honest, the Nucleo boards have other interesting advantages compared to
the Discovery ones. First of all, ST sells them at a really aggressive price
(probably for the aforementioned reasons). A Nucleo costs between $10 and
$15, depending on where you buy it, and if you think about what you can do with
this architecture, you have to agree that it is really underpriced compared to an
Arduino DUE board (which is also equipped with a 32-bit ARM processor from
Microchip). Another interesting feature is that Nucleo boards are designed to be
pin-to-pin compatible with each other. This means that you can develop the
firmware for the STM32Nucleo-F103RB board (equipped with the popular
STM32F103 MCU) and later adapt it to a more powerful Nucleo (e.g.
STM32Nucleo-F401RE) if you need more computing power.

Figure 1.20: Peripherals and GPIOs associated
                                   to Arduino headers

In addition to Arduino compatible pin headers, the Nucleo provides its own
expansion connectors. They are two 2x19, 2.54mm spaced male pin headers.
They are called Morpho connectors and are a convenient way to access most of
the MCU pins. Figure 1.21 shows the STM32 peripherals and GPIOs associated
with the Morpho connector.

Figure 1.21: Peripherals and GPIOs associated
                                   to Morpho headers

ST is releasing several expansion shields for the Nucleo that are compatible with
the Arduino UNO or the ST Morpho header. For example, Figure 1.22 shows a
Nucleo-F302R8 board with a X-NUCLEO-IHM07M1 expansion board, a shield
which features the ST L6230 DMOS driver, a motor control solution for low
voltage 3-phase DC brushless motors.

Figure 1.22: The X-NUCLEO-IHM07M1 expansion shield

There are third-two Nucleo boards available at the time of writing this chapter
(February 2022). Table 1.21 summarizes the main features of the Nucleo boards
used to make the samples in this book, together with the ones common to all
Nucleo-64 boards18.

Table 1.21: The list of Nucleo boards used in this text and
                                  their specific features
Why Use the Nucleo as Example Board for This Book?
The answers to this question are almost all contained in the previous paragraphs. First of all,
Nucleo boards are cheap, and allow you to start learning the STM32 platform at nearly no cost.
Second, they greatly simplify the instructions and examples contained in this book. You are
completely free to use the Nucleo you like. The book will show all the steps required to easily
adapt examples to your specific Nucleo.

Keep in mind that the whole book is designed to give the reader all the necessary tools to start
working with any board, even custom ones. It will be easy to adapt the examples to your needs.
