2. Get In Touch With SM32CubeIDE
Before we can start developing applications for the STM32 platform, we need a
complete tool-chain. A tool-chain is a set of programs, compilers and tools that
allows us:

     to write down our code and to navigate inside source files of our
     application;
     to navigate inside the application code, allowing us to inspect variables,
     function definitions/declarations, and so on;
     to compile the source code using a cross-platform compiler;
     to upload and debug our application on the target development board (or a
     custom board we have made).

To accomplish these activities, we essentially need:

     an IDE with integrated source editor and navigator;
     a cross-platform compiler able to compile source code for the ARM
     Cortex-M platform;
     a debugger that allows us to execute step by step debugging of firmware on
     the target board;
     a tool that allows to interact with the integrated hardware debugger of our
     Nucleo board (the ST-LINK interface) or the dedicated programmer (e.g., a
     JTAG adapter).

In this chapter I will show how to install and to run the STM32CubeIDE tool-
chain on Windows, Mac OS and Linux and I will provide to you an essential
overview of the main functionalities of the Eclipse IDE.

2.1 Why Choose STM32CubeIDE as Tool-Chain for STM32
It has been a long time since the first edition of this book, and a lot of things are
changed. Traditionally, STM32 lacked an official development environment
fully, directly and actively maintained by ST. In the past years, ST tried to
support several open source and community-based projects, all based on the free
Eclipse/GCC tool-chains. However, none of these projects (CooCox, AC6)
reached a real maturity level and this represented one of the major roadblocks in
starting to work with STM32 microcontrollers.
The first edition of this book was characterized by the fact that it showed how to
setup a complete, cross-platform and totally free tool-chain from scratch. It was
an Eclipse-based tool-chain with the addition of a set of plug-ins, named Eclipse
Embedded CDT, developed and maintained by Liviu Ionescu, who did a really
excellent work in providing support for the GCC ARM tool-chain. Without those
plug-ins it was almost impossible to develop and run code with Eclipse for the
STM32 platform. This project is now one of the official Eclipse Foundation
projects, and it is still a good development environment to work with, especially
if you are used to work with different Cortex-M platform.

At the end of 2017 STM decided to acquire Atollic, the company behind the
TrueStudio IDE, a commercial distribution of Eclipse CDT and ARM GCC with
the addition of dedicated plug-ins to develop embedded applications for ARM
Cortex-M microcontrollers. After the acquisition of Atollic, ST decided to
release the TrueStudio IDE for free for all STM32 developers, and the IDE was
renamed in STM32CubeIDE. As we will see in this book, STM32CubeIDE is
much more than a flavor of Eclipse CDT. ST invested a lot in integrating all the
STM32-related tools inside just one piece of software, without requiring to
developers to deal with the installation of several non-integrated tools scattered
around the STM website. Moreover, STM finally completed the porting of all
fundamental development tools to Linux and MacOS, allowing programmers to
work with their favorite OS. This represents a true quantum leap for the STM32
platform, and nowadays I cannot see any real reason to use other development
environments, unless you have strong requirements related to your very specific
application (for example, to develop electronics for the automotive/aerospace
industry). For this and other reasons better explained next, this edition of the
book will be entirely based on the STM32CubeIDE.

However, despite the fact that STM32CubeIDE is now the official development
environment by ST, there are several additional considerations to take in account
while evaluating your tool-chain if you are in doubt about which to choose. Here
you can find just a few considerations:

     It is GCC based: GCC is probably the best compiler on the earth, and it
     gives excellent results even with ARM based processors. ARM is
     nowadays the most widespread architecture (thanks to the embedded
     systems becoming widespread in the recent years), and many hardware and
     software manufacturers use GCC as the base tool for their platform.
     It is cross-platform: if you have a Windows PC, the latest sexy Mac or a
     Linux server you will be able to successfully develop, compile and upload
     the firmware on your development board with no difference. Nowadays,
     this is a mandatory requirement.
     Eclipse diffusion: a lot of IDEs for STM32 are also based on Eclipse,
     which has become a sort of standard. There are a lot of useful plug-ins for
     Eclipse that you can download with just one click. And it is a product that
     evolves day by day.
     Eclipse It is Open Source: ok. I agree. For such giant pieces of software, it
     is really hard to try to understand their internals and modify the code,
     especially if you are a hardware engineer committed to transistors and
     interrupts management. But if you get in trouble with your tool, it is simpler
     to try to understand what goes wrong with an open source tool than a closed
     one.
     Large and growing community: these tools have by now a great
     international community, which continuously develops new features and
     fixes bugs. You will find tons of examples and blogs, which can help you
     during your work. Moreover, many companies, which have adopted this
     software as official tools, give economical contribution to the main
     development. This guarantees that the software will not suddenly disappear.
     It is free: Yep. I placed this as the last point, but it is not the least. As said
     before, a commercial IDE can cost a fortune for a small company or a
     hobbyist/student. And the availability of free tools is one of the key
     advantages of the STM32 platform.

If you are completely new to Eclipse and/or GCC, here are some more specific
considerations regarding these two products.

2.1.1 Two Words About Eclipse…

Eclipse is an Open Source and a free Java based IDE. Despite this fact
(unfortunately, Java programs tend to eat a lot of machine resources and to slow
down your PC), Eclipse is one of the most widespread and complete
development environments. Eclipse comes in several pre-configured versions,
customized for specific uses. For example, the Eclipse IDE for Java Developers
comes preconfigured to work with Java and with all those tools used in this
development platform (Ant, Maven, and so on). In our case, the STM32CubeIDE
is essentially based on the Eclipse IDE for C/C++ Developers.
Eclipse is designed to be expandable thanks to plug-ins. There are several plug-
ins available in Eclipse Marketplace useful for software development for
embedded systems. We will install and use most of them in this book. Moreover,
Eclipse is highly customizable. I strongly suggest you to take a look at its
settings, which allow you to adapt it to your needs and flavor.

2.1.2 … and GCC

The GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) is a complete and widespread compiler
suite. It is the only development tool able to compile several programming
languages (front-end) to tens of hardware architectures that come in several
variants. GCC is a really complex piece of software. It provides several tools to
accomplish compilation tasks. These include, in addition to the compiler itself,
an assembler, a linker, a debugger (known as GNU Debugger - GDB), several
tools for binary files inspection, disassembly and optimization. Moreover, GCC
is also equipped with the run-time environment for the C language, customized
for the target architecture.

In recent years, several companies, even in the embedded world, have adopted
GCC as their official compiler. For example, NXP uses GCC as cross-compiler
for its LPC family of Cortex microcontrollers.

       What Is a Cross-Compiler?

       We usually refer to term compiler as a tool able to generate machine code for the processor in our
       PC. A compiler is just a “language translator” from a given programming language (C in our case)
       to a low-level machine language, also known as assembly. For example, if we are working on Intel
       x86 machine, we use a compiler to generate x86 assembly code from the C programming
       language. For the sake of completeness, we have to say that nowadays a compiler is a more
       complex tool that addresses both the specific target hardware processor and the Operating System
       we are using (e.g., Windows 7).

       A cross-platform compiler is a compiler able to generate machine code for a hardware machine
       different from the one we are using to develop our applications. In our case, the GCC ARM
       Embedded compiler generates machine code for Cortex-M processors while compiling on an x86
       machine with a given OS (e.g., Windows or Mac OSX).
In the ARM world, GCC is the most used compiler especially due the fact that it
is used as main development tool for Linux based Operating Systems for ARM
Cortex-A processors (ARM microcontrollers that equip almost every mobile
device). ARM engineers actively maintain the ARM GCC branch of GCC.
STM32CubeIDE uses one of the most recent GCC based tool-chains. Finally,
consider that acquiring knowledge about this suite of compilers can be also
useful in future: it is a skill that can be reused also for other embedded
architectures.

2.2 Downloading and Installing the STM32CubeIDE
The STM32CubeIDE can be freely downloaded from the official STM website.
The only requirement is that you register on the STM website providing a valid
email address.

In the same webpage you can find the installation packages for all operating
systems. You will find five links, as shown in Figure 2.119. Three links are
related to Linux, while the other two are for Windows and MacOS:

     STM32CubeIDE-Win: this executable package contains the installer for
     Windows.
     STM32CubeIDE-Mac: this ZIP file contains the DMG file (Apple Disk
     Image) with the installer for Mac OSX.
     STM32CubeIDE-DEB: this package contains a Linux Debian installation
     package (.deb package). This is for Linux Debian distributions and derived
     (notably Ubuntu).
     STM32CubeIDE-RPM: this package contains a Linux RedHat installation
     package (.rpm package). This is for Linux RedHat distributions and derived
     (notably CentOS).
     STM32CubeIDE-Lnx: this is a generic Linux tarball containing the
     STM32CubeIDE and all necessary tools and libraries. This package is for
     advanced Linux users, who usually know how to install by themselves
     custom applications.

Select the porting of STM32CubeIDE for your Operating System by clicking on
the pinky icon “Get Software” in the download section. Once the software is
downloaded, follow the instructions in the next sections.
Figure 2.1: The STM32CubeIDE download page on the
                                     official STM website

       The next three paragraphs, and their sub-paragraphs, are almost identical. They only differ on
       those parts specific for the given OS (Windows, Linux or Mac OS). So, jump to the paragraph you
       are interested in, and skip the remaining ones.

2.2.1 Windows - Installing the Tool-Chain

The Windows installation package is contained inside a ZIP file. Once the
download has completed, extract the ZIP archive and run the contained
executable file (the executable filename has this structure: st-
stm32cubeide_VERSION_x86_64.exe, where VERSION corresponds to the latest
release of the IDE).
During the installation process, the Windows may display a dialog stating: “Do
you want to allow this app to make changes to your device?” with info
“Verified publisher: STMicroelectronics Software AB”. Accept by clicking on
“YES” to let the installer continue.
Figure 2.2: Windows installer
                                   welcome page

After few seconds the “Welcome to…” page of the installer appears, as shown in
Figure 2.2. Click on “Next”, read the license agreement and click on “I Agree”
to accept the terms of the agreement.
In the next dialog (see Figure 2.3), it is possible to select the location for the
installation. It is recommended to choose a short path to avoid facing Windows
limitations with too long paths for the workspace. My suggestion is to leave the
default path (C:\ST\STM32CubeIDE).

Figure 2.3: Chose Install Location
                                        dialog
        Individual Projects will not be stored inside that path. Instead, they are grouped inside a preferred
        location named “Workspace”. This is the common Eclipse’s way to store projects, and the good
        news is that it is possible to have as many workspaces as you want: each workspace represents a
        totally independent environment, both from the stored projects point-of-view and the IDE
        configurations. This means that you can customize each workspace according to your specific
        needs. Every project, every installed plug-in, every IDE and tools configurations will be local to that
        specific workspace. This is also a lot useful for beginners: it is not that uncommon to mess with the
        IDE configuration and to break some relevant configurations. If this the case, you simply need to
        throw away the current workspace and to make a new one, without affecting the overall system
        configuration.

Once the installation path is chosen, click on “Next”. The “Choose Components”
dialog is displayed as shown in Figure 2.4. Unless you are confident with those
flags, my suggestion is to leave all of them checked. The role of those
components will be clearer as we progress through the book.
Click on the “Install” button and wait for the completion of the operations. In this
step, the installer will copy in the selected location the IDE and all relevant
components: a Java virtual machine, Eclipse and all it is plug-ins, GCC compiler
and debuggers, Windows drivers for ST-LINK debuggers.

Figure 2.4: Choose Components
                                                 dialog

At the end of the installation step, click on “Finish”.

The next tool to install is the STM32CubeProgrammer. It is a software that
uploads the firmware on the MCU using the ST-LINK interface of our Nucleo, or
a dedicated ST-LINK programmer. We will not use this tool too much in the
book, apart for the next chapter. However, this tool comes in handy very often
during the common development life cycle, especially if for small production
lots. So, I think that it is ok to get familiar with this tool.

You can download STM32CubeProgrammer from the official ST page (the
download link is at the bottom of the page in the “Get Software” section). Once
the download is completed, extract the .zip package. You will find the
SetupSTM32CubeProgrammer-2.9.0.exe file. Run it and follow the installation
instructions.

The tool-chain installation is now complete, and you can jump to the
STM32CubeIDE overview paragraph if you are totally new to the Eclipse IDE.

2.2.2 Linux - Installing the Tool-Chain

The whole installation procedure will assume these requirements:

     A PC running a recent Linux-64bit version:
          Ubuntu Linux 20.04 LTS Desktop or later
          Fedora 29 or later
     Sufficient hardware resources (I suggest having at least 4Gb of RAM and
     20Gb of free space on the Hard Disk); the instructions should be easily
     arranged for other Linux distributions.

The installer comes in different bundles to suit the various Linux distributions.
The bundles are named st-stm32cubeide_VERSION_ARCHITECTURE.PACKAGE
where:

     VERSION is the actual product version and build date (for example:
     1.0.0_2026_20190221_1309)
     ARCHITECTURE is the architecture of the target host computer to run
     STM32CubeIDE (for example: amd64)
     PACKAGE is the Linux package type to be installed. The supported
     packages are:
          rpm_bundle.sh for Fedora/CentOS
          deb_bundle.sh for Ubuntu/Debian
          .sh for generic Linux

Proceed as follows:
1. Navigate to the location of the installer file with a command console on the
host computer. 2. Enter the following command in the console window:
1 $ sudo sh ./st-stm32cubeide_VERSION_ARCHITECHURE.PACKAGE

where VERSION, ARCHITECTURE and PACKAGE must be entered after the selected
Linux package.

3. Follow the further instructions provided through the console window.

The next tool to install is the STM32CubeProgrammer. It is a software that
uploads the firmware on the MCU using the ST-LINK interface of our Nucleo, or
a dedicated ST-LINK programmer. We will not use this tool too much in the
book, apart for the next chapter. However, this tool comes in handy very often
during the common development life cycle, especially if for small production
lots. So, I think that it is ok to get familiar with this tool.

To execute the STM32CubeProgrammer in Linux, it is required you have some
packages already installed on your machine. The needed packages are:

     libusb-1.0.0-dev

The installation of this packaged changes according to the specific Linux
distribution.
In Ubuntu they can be installed with the following commands at the terminal
prompt:
$ sudo apt-get install libusb libusb-1.0.0-dev

You can download STM32CubeProgrammer from the official ST page (the
download link is at the bottom of the page in the “Get Software” section). Once
the download is completed, extract the .zip package. You will find the
SetupSTM32CubeProgrammer-2.9.0.linux file. Run it and follow the
installation instructions.

Jump to the STM32CubeIDE overview paragraph if you are totally new to the
Eclipse IDE.

2.2.3 Mac - Installing the Tool-Chain
The MacOS installation package is contained inside a ZIP file. Once the
download has completed, extract the ZIP archive and run the contained DMG file
(the filename has this structure: st-stm32cubeide_VERSION_x86_64.dmg,
where VERSION corresponds to the latest release of the IDE). Double-click on
the DMG file to let MacOS mount the Apple disk image. The License Agreement
dialog appears, as shown in Figure 2.5.

Figure 2.5: License Agreement dialog

Read the license agreement and click “Agree” to accept the terms of the
agreement and to move on with the software installation. The Install page
appears, as shown in Figure 2.6. Before we drag the large IDE icon inside the
Application folder it is important to install the ST-LINK server package first.
So, click on the Install me 1st icon (the classical icon representing a software
package in MacOS) and follow the installation instructions.

       MacOS will prevent you from installing the software, being it download from an untrusted website
       and not from the official App Store. However, I assume that you are sufficiently familiar with
       MacOS and able to bypass this restriction by going in the MacOS System Preferences-
       >Security and Privacy settings. Alternatively, you can completely disable the MacOS
       Gatekeeper (the component that enforces code signing and verifies downloaded applications before
       allowing them to run in recent MacOS releases) by running the following command at MacOS
       terminal:

                $ sudo spctl --master-disable

Once completed, you can safely drag the IDE icon inside the Application
folder and wait until the operation completes.
Figure 2.6: Install page dialog

       Read Carefully!

       It is very common for MacOS users to fail to run the STM32CubeIDE the first time they launch
       the application. The following system warning is shown:

       Unfortunately, this error is due to wrong extended attribute permissions, and it is mostly related to
       the new path of MacOS X, which is driving MacOS toward a sort of more advanced iOS.
       Honestly speaking, being a really old and advanced MacOS user, I cannot see anything good with
       this drift.
       However, the good news is that you can easily get rid of this issue by opening the MacOS Terminal
       and executing the following command at the prompt:

                $ xattr -c /Applications/STM32CubeIDE.app

       This should fix the issue and you should be able to run the STM32CubeIDE.

The next tool to install is the STM32CubeProgrammer. It is a software that
uploads the firmware on the MCU using the ST-LINK interface of our Nucleo, or
a dedicated ST-LINK programmer. We will not use this tool too much in the
book, apart for the next chapter. However, this tool comes in handy very often
during the common development life cycle, especially if for small production
lots. So, I think that it is ok to get familiar with this tool.
You can download STM32CubeProgrammer from the official ST page (the
download link is at the bottom of the page in the “Get Software” section). Once
the download is completed, extract the .zip package. You will find the
SetupSTM32CubeProgrammer-2.9.0.app file. Run it and follow the installation
instructions.

The tool-chain installation is complete, and you can jump to the next paragraph if
you are totally new to the Eclipse IDE.

2.3 STM32CubeIDE overview
Now that we have completed the installation of the tool-chain, we can have a
first look to the main interface and functionalities.
When you start Eclipse you are asked to indicate a workspace directory, as
shown in Figure 2.7. You are free to point this folder in any location of your hard
drive.

Figure 2.7: Eclipse workspace selection
                                         dialog

The workspace is a directory on the disk where the Eclipse platform and all the
installed plug-ins store preferences, configurations and temporary information.
Subsequent Eclipse invocations will use this storage to restore the previous
state. As the name suggests, it is your “space of work”. It defines your area of
interest during an Eclipse session. Apart from IDE configuration parameters, a
workspace is also a repository for all projects belonging to a given workspace.

Having more than a workspace is mostly a programmer’s choice, who can
organize projects and IDE configurations according to personal needs. If you do
not plan to have multiple workspaces, you can check the flag Use this as the
default and do not ask again. Eclipse will automatically open the workspace
during startup.
       Anytime you decide to change your mind and want to switch to a new workspace, you can
       overwrite the default configuration by clicking on File->Switch workspace->Other…. The
       dialog in Figure 2.7 will appear again and you will be able to select a different workspace.

Once the default workspace location is set, click on the Launch button, and wait
for the complete Eclipse startup.

When you start STM32CubeIDE, you might be a bit puzzled by its interface if
you are new to Eclipse. Figure 2.8 shows how Eclipse appears when started for
the first time.

Figure 2.8: The Eclipse interface once started for the first time

Eclipse is a multi-view IDE, organized so that all the functionalities are
displayed in one window, but the user is free to arrange the interface at its needs.
When Eclipse starts, a welcome screen is presented. The content of that Welcome
Tab is called view.
Figure 2.9: How to close
                                       the Welcome view by
                                         clicking on the X.

To close the Welcome view, click on the cross icon, as shown in Figure 2.9.
Once the Welcome view goes away, the C/C++ perspective appears, as shown in
Figure 2.10.

Figure 2.10: The C/C++ perspective view in eclipse (with a main.c file
                                      loaded later)

       In case you want to show back the welcome view, click on the icon circled in red on the main
       toolbar and shown in the picture below.
In Eclipse a perspective is a way to arrange views in a manner that is related to
the functionalities of the perspective. The C/C++ perspective is dedicated to
coding, and it presents all aspects related to the editing of the source code and its
compiling. It is divided into four views.

The view on the left, named Project Explorer, shows all projects inside the
workspace. The centered view, that is the larger one, is the C/C++ editor. Each
source file is shown as a tab, and it is possible to have many tabs opened at the
same time.

The views in the bottom of Eclipse window are dedicated to several activities
related to compiling, and they are subdivided into tabs. For example, the
Console tab shows the output from the compiler; the Problems tab organizes all
messages coming from the compiler in a convenient way to inspect them; the
Search tab contains the search results.

The view on the right contains several other tabs. For example, the Outline tab
shows the symbols contained in each source file (functions, variables, and so
on), allowing quickly navigation inside the file content.

There are other views available (and many other ones that are provided by
custom plug-ins). Users can see them by going inside the Window->Show View-
>Other… menu. Some of them will be analyzed in later chapters.

       Sometimes it happens that a view is “minimized” and it seems to disappear from the IDE. When
       you are new to Eclipse, this might lead to frustration trying to understand where it went.
       For example, looking at Figure 2.11 it seems that the Project Explorer view has disappeared, but
       it is simply minimized and you can restore it clicking on the icon circled in red.
       However, sometimes the view has really been closed. This happens when there is only one tab
       active in that view and we close it. In this case you can enable the view again going in the
       Window->Show View->Other… menu.
Figure 2.11: Project Explorer view
                                            minimized

To switch between different perspectives, you can use the specific toolbar
available in the top-right side of Eclipse (see Figure 2.12)

Figure 2.12: Perspective
                                          switcher toolbar

By default, the other available perspective is Debug, which we will see in more
depth later. You can enable other perspectives by going to Window-
>Perspective->Open Perspective->Other… menu.

       Starting from Eclipse 4.6 (aka Neon), the perspective switcher toolbar no longer shows the
       perspective name by default, but only the icon associated to the perspective. This tends to confuse
       novice users. You can show the perspective name near its icon by clicking with the right button of
       the mouse on the toolbar and selecting the Show Text entry, as shown below.
Eclipse IDE is designed with a main toolbar that adapts its content according to
the type of files selected inside the main perspective view. The most common
and relevant icons in the toolbar are explained in the Table 2.1.

Table 2.1: Main Eclipse’s toolbar icons

As we go forward with the topics of this book, we will have a chance to see
other features of Eclipse.
