3. Hello, Nucleo!
There is no programming book that does not begin with the classic “Hello
world!” program. And this book will follow the tradition. In the previous chapter
we have configured the STM32CubeIDE needed to develop STM32 embedded
applications. So, we are now ready to start coding.

In this chapter we will create a really basic program: a blinking LED. We will
use the STM32CubeIDE to create a complete application in a few steps without
dealing, in this phase, with aspects related to the ST Hardware Abstraction
Layer (HAL) and the MCU graphical configurator (better known as
STM32CubeMX). I am aware that not all details presented in this chapter will
be clear from the beginning, especially if you are totally new to embedded
programming.
However, this first example will allow us to become familiar with the
development environment. Following chapters, especially the next one, will
clarify a lot of obscure things. So, I suggest you to be patient and try to take the
best from the following paragraphs.

3.1 Create a Project
Let us create our first project. We will create a simple application that makes the
Nucleo LD2 LED (the green one) blink.
Go to File->New->STM32 Project. Depending on your current IDE
configuration, the Target Selection wizard (shown in Figure 3.1) will appear in
a while.

        The first time you run the Target Selection wizard it may require several seconds to show. A
        progress indicator will prompt you about the fetching of MCUs and boards specifications from ST’s
        servers. New STM32 microcontrollers or development kits are released monthly, and the tool is
        designed so that it is not wired with the complete list of part numbers. So, be patient and let the
        software to complete the operations.

As we will learn later, the Target Selection wizard is part of a more complex
piece of software formerly known as STM32CubeMX. This tool is designed to
dramatically streamline the configuration process of hardware peripherals of a
given STM32 MCU, as well as the generation of all necessary library files to
drive those peripherals. The next chapter will be entirely based on the
explanation of the most relevant STM32CubeMX functionalities. So, we will not
spend too much time on this matter now.

Now click on the Board Selector tab (highlighted in light blue in Figure 3.1),
expand the menu Type and check the Nucleo-64 family of boards. Dig inside the
list of boards to find your specific Nucleo-64 board.

Figure 3.1: The Target Selection wizard - STEP 1

       As mentioned in Chapter 1, this book is entirely based on the Nucleo-64 board, and the examples in
       the text are tested for the boards listed in Table 1.18. However, the aim of this book is to teach
       the foundation concepts of STM32 programming. My opinion is that it should be relatively easy to
       adapt this and all other examples in the text to any other development board (Nucleo-32, Nucleo-
       144, Discovery, and so on).
Figure 3.2: Project wizard -
                                       STEP 2

Once you select the board in the list, click on Next button. Specify a Project
Name in the relative field (hello-nucleo in our case, but feel free to choose what
it is best for you) and leave all other flags with the default configuration, as
shown in Figure 3.1. Click on Finish to start the project generation.
The STM32CubeIDE will ask you if you want to initialize all peripherals with
their default mode, as shown in Figure 3.3. What does this mean?

Figure 3.3: Project wizard -
                                       STEP 3

In every development board the target MCU (that is, the main MCU where the
firmware is uploaded) is both equipped with internal peripherals (e.g., the Real
Time Clock - RTC) and wired to several external other devices through
individual GPIO pins. For example, in every Nucleo-64 board one GPIO is
directly connected to the green USER LED, marked as LD2 on the PCB. To use
those “default” peripherals, we have to properly configure both the internal
peripheral and the corresponding GPIOs. By answering Yes to this question, we
instruct the IDE to automatically perform all the necessary configurations to use
all internal and external default peripherals for the Nucleo-64 board.
As soon as we will dive into the book, you will learn how to configure every
peripheral by yourself. However, in this phase, to keep things simple, click on
the Yes and let the IDE do the magic.
The STM32CubeIDE will start the generation of the new project. If this is the
first time you create a project for the STM32 family of your Nucleo board (that
is, STM32F0, STM32F4, etc.), the IDE needs to download the corresponding
Cube Firmware Package (for example, if your board is a Nucleo-F401RE, it
needs to download the stm32cube_fw_f4_v1XXX.zip package for the
STM32F4 family). These packages contain several relevant components:

     The complete HAL for the given STM32 family: the Hardware
     Abstraction Layer (HAL) is the set of libraries that allow to drive the
     microcontroller peripherals and core features without dealing with the
     details of the given MCU. This book is entirely based on the
     STM32CubeHAL and we will learn a lot regarding this quite complex
     library.
     Additional Middleware packages: some STM32 MCUs integrate advanced
     peripherals that require additional libraries to be used (either developed by
     ST or by third parties) . For example, to program the USB controller
     integrated in some STM32 MCUs it is necessary to use the complete USB
     stack freely provided by ST. Every Cube Firmware package comes with a
     set of Middleware libraries, and we will analyze several of them in the
     third part of this book.
     Examples projects for development boards: ST provides a lot of
     complete and working examples for its development boards. Every example
     is made to show how-to use a given feature of the board. Every Cube
     Firmware package integrates several examples, and you can browse the
     complete example list by clicking on the Example Selector tab in the
     Target Selection wizard (see Figure 3.1).

Figure 3.4: Cube
                                 Firmware Package
                                  download dialog

Depending on the STM32 family, the size of a Cube Firmware package can be
quite relevant. The basic rule is that the more powerful the STM32 family is the
larger the corresponding Cube Firmware is. So, be patient and wait for the
complete download, as shown by the specific dialog (see Figure 3.4).

3.2 Adding Something Useful to the Generated Code
Figure 3.5 shows what appears in the STM32CubeIDE after the project has been
generated. The Project Explorer view shows the project structure. This is the
content of the first-level folders (going from top to bottom)20:

Includes
       This folder shows all folders that are part of the GCC Include Folders21.
Core
       This Eclipse folder contains the generated project, made of several .c files
       that make up our application. One of these files is src/main.c, which
       contains the int main(void) routine that we are going to customize in a
       while.
Drivers
       This Eclipse folder usually contains header and source files of many
       relevant libraries (like, among the other, the ST CubeHAL and the CMSIS
       package). We will see them more in depth in the next chapter.
hello-nucleo.ioc
       This file is the STM32CubeMX project graphically shown in the Device
       Configuration Tool view (the default main view after project generation
       and shown in Figure 3.5). We will analyze deeply the STM32CubeMX
       interface and functionalities in the next chapter.
Figure 3.5: The STM32CubeIDE interface after complete project
                                     generation

We are now ready to start working at the real core application. The project
generated by the IDE automatically contains all the necessary code to build a
self-consistent application. To make the LD2 LED blink we need to add just two
lines of code to the main() function, the entry point22 of our custom application.
So, in the Project explorer pane, expand the folders Core->Src and double
click on the main.c file. Go at around line 66, where you can find the definition
of the main() function. Here you can find the invocation of four routines23:

     HAL_Init(): this function initializes the CubeHAL framework. It is
     responsible of the very first MCU initialization. We will analyze this
     function later in the book.
     SystemClock_Config(): this function plays a really paramount role, since
     it configure the MCU to work with one of the possible clock sources.
     STM32 MCUs offer the possibility to use several different clock sources.
     This is an advanced topic that we will deepen in Chapter 10.
     MX_GPIO_Init(): this function initializes I/O pins, according to the
     graphical configuration done in STM32CubeMX. In our case it is going to
     configure the GPIO pin associated to the LD2 LED. More about these topics
     in Chapter 6.
     MX_USART2_UART_Init(): this function initializes the UART2 peripheral,
     which is wired to the ST-LINK interface in all Nucleo boards. More about
     this in Chapter 8.
Right after the invocation of those four initialization routines, you can find a
while loop, an infinite loop where all the firmware activities take place. Here
you can add two function calls, as shown next at lines 101-102.
                                 Filename: src/main.c
 66 int main(void)
 67 {
 68   /* USER CODE BEGIN 1 */
 69
 70   /* USER CODE END 1 */
 71
 72   /* MCU Configuration--------------------------------------------------------*/
 73
 74   /* Reset of all peripherals, Initializes the Flash interface and the Systick.
*/
 75   HAL_Init();
 76
 77   /* USER CODE BEGIN Init */
 78
 79   /* USER CODE END Init */
 80
 81   /* Configure the system clock */
 82   SystemClock_Config();
 83
 84   /* USER CODE BEGIN SysInit */
 85
 86   /* USER CODE END SysInit */
 87
 88   /* Initialize all configured peripherals */
 89   MX_GPIO_Init();
 90   MX_USART2_UART_Init();
 91   /* USER CODE BEGIN 2 */
 92
 93   /* USER CODE END 2 */
 94
 95   /* Infinite loop */
 96   /* USER CODE BEGIN WHILE */
 97   while (1)
 98   {
 99     /* USER CODE END WHILE */
100     /* USER CODE BEGIN 3 */
101     HAL_GPIO_TogglePin(LD2_GPIO_Port, LD2_Pin);
102     HAL_Delay(500);
103   }
104   /* USER CODE END 3 */
       You will have noticed that the code generated by CubeMX is full of these commented regions:

          /* USER CODE BEGIN 1 */
          ...
          /* USER CODE END 1 */

       What are those comments for? CubeMX is designed so that if you change the hardware
       configuration you can regenerate the project code without losing the pieces of code you have
       added. Placing your code inside those “guarded regions” should guarantee that you will not lose
       your work. However, I have to admit that sometimes CubeMX can make a mess with generated
       files, and the user code goes lost. So, I suggest always generating another separated project and
       doing a copy and paste of the changed code inside the application files. This also gives you the full
       control over your code.

The code should be self-explanatory. The HAL_GPIO_TogglePin() function
simply inverts the logical state of the PIN connected to the LD2 LED (which
corresponds to PIN 5 of the GPIO port A in all Nucleo-64 boards), while the
function HAL_Delay() is just a busy wait spin that lasts 500ms: the LD2 so will
blink at 1HZ rate.
        How can we know to which pin the LED is connected? ST provides schematics of the Nucleo
        board. Schematics are made using the Altium Designer CAD, a quite expensive piece of software
        used in the professional world. However, luckily for us, ST provides a convenient PDF with
        schematics. Looking at page 4, we can see that the LED is connected to the PA5 pin24, as shown
        in Figure 3.6.

Figure 3.6: LD2 connection to PA5

        PA5 is shorthand for PIN5 of GPIOA port, which is the standard way to indicate a GPIO in the
        STM32 world. Finally, STM32CubeMX automatically defines the macro LD2_GPIO_Port and
        LD2_Pin so that their expansion corresponds to GPIOA port and PIN5.

We can now compile the project. Go to menu Project->Build Project. After a
while, we should see something similar to this in the output console25.
arm-none-eabi-size   hello-nucleo.elf
arm-none-eabi-objdump -h -S hello-nucleo.elf > "hello-nucleo.list"
arm-none-eabi-objcopy -O binary hello-nucleo.elf "hello-nucleo.bin"
   text    data     bss     dec     hex filename
   8224      20    1636    9880    2698 hello-nucleo.elf
Finished building: default.size.stdout
Finished building: hello-nucleo.bin
Finished building: hello-nucleo.list

15:22:52 Build Finished. 0 errors, 0 warnings. (took 5s.769ms)

3.3 Connecting the Nucleo to the PC
Once we have compiled our test project, you can connect the Nucleo board to
your computer using a USB cable connected to micro-USB port (called VCP in
Figure 3.7). You should see at least two LEDs turning ON.
       Read Carefully

       Please, ensure that the USB port is able to provide sufficient power to the board. It is strongly
       suggested to use a USB port able to provide at least 500mAh or a self-powered external hub.

Figure 3.7: A Nucleo board and its main
                                             interfaces

The first one is the LD1 LED, which in Figure 3.7 is labeled ST-LINK LED. It is
a red/green LED, and it is used to signal the ST-LINK activity: once the board is
connected to the computer, that LED is green; during a debug session or while
uploading the firmware on the MCU it blinks green and red alternatively.

Another LED that turns ON when the board is connected to the computer is the
LED LD3, which is labeled POWER LED in Figure 3.7. It is a red LED that
turns ON when the USB port ends enumeration, that is the ST-LINK interface is
properly recognized by the computer OS as a USB peripheral. The target MCU
on the board is powered only when that LED is ON (this means that the ST-LINK
interface also manages the powering of the target MCU).

Finally, if you have not still flashed your board with a custom firmware, you will
see that the LD2 LED, the green LED labeled USER LED in Figure 3.7, also
blinks: this happens because ST preloads the board with a firmware that makes
the LD2 LED blinking. You can change the blinking frequency by pressing the
switch label USER BTN in Figure 3.7 (the blue one).
We are going to replace the on-board firmware with the one made by us before in
a while. Before we move on with this step, it is important to be sure that the ST-
LINK debugger in our Nucleo board is equipped with the latest ST-LINK 2.1
firmware.

3.3.1 ST-LINK Firmware Upgrade

       Warning

       Read this paragraph carefully. Do not skip this step!

I bought several Nucleo boards, and I saw that all boards usually come with a
quite old ST-LINK firmware. To use the Nucleo with latest STM32CubeIDE, the
firmware must be updated at least to the V2J37.x version.

The upgrade procedure can be easily carried on with the STM32CubeIDE.
Connect your Nucleo board using a USB cable and go to Help->ST-LINK
Upgrade. The ST-LINK Upgrade program appears, as shown in Figure 3.8

Figure 3.8: The ST-LINK Upgrade program

Click on Refresh device list: the connected board should be identified as ST-
LINK/V2-1. Click on Open in update mode. ST-LINK Upgrade will show if
your Nucleo firmware needs to be updated (pointing out a different version, as
shown in Figure 3.8). If so, click on the Upgrade button and wait till the
firmware is updated.
       Error in upgrading the ST-LINK firmware

       The above procedure may fail when you click on Open in update mode button. The
       STLinkUpgrade tool may show the error massage Error connecting to device ST-LINK/V2-1
       (error 0x1); check the USB connection and refresh device list even if the board is properly
       connected to the PC. This usually happens due to an insufficient powering of the board. Try to use
       a self-powered USB HUB or use another USB port. This error is quite common on recent iMac
       when connecting the board to an Apple keyboard if use a keyboard with integrated USB port.

3.4 Flashing the Nucleo using STM32CubeProgrammer
We installed STM32CubeProgrammer in Chapter 2 and now we are going to use
it. Launch the program and connect your Nucleo to the PC using the USB cable.
Click the refresh button, circled in red in Figure 3.9.
Once STM32CubeProgrammer has identified the board, its serial number will
appear in the Serial number box, as shown in Figure 3.9.

Figure 3.9: The ST-LINK
                                      interface serial number
                                            as shown by
                                     STM32CubeProgrammer
                                                tool

       Read Carefully

       If the label “Old ST-LINK Firmware” appears instead of the ST-LINK interface serial number,
       then you need to update the ST-LINK firmware to the latest version. Click on the Firmware
       upgrade button at the bottom of the ST-LINK Configuration pane and follow the same
       instructions reported in the previous paragraph.
Once the ST-LINK board has been identified, click the Connect button. After a
while you will see the content of flash memory, as shown in Figure 3.10. Ok, let
us finally upload the example firmware to the board.
Click on the Erase & programming icon (the second green icon on the left).
Then, click on the Browse button in the File programming. Go in your Eclipse
workspace directory (by default, the path is
%HOMEPATH%\STM32CubeIDE\workspace_1.X.0. in Windows or
~/STM32CubeIDE7workspace_1.X.0 in Linux and Mac OS, where 1.X.0
corresponds to the exact release of your STM32CubeIDE). Then move inside the
hello_nucleo\Debug sub-folder and choose the file named
hello_nucleo.elf.
Check the Verify programming and Run after programming flags and click on
Start Programming button to start flashing. At the end of flashing procedure
your Nucleo green LED will start blinking.

Congratulations: welcome to the STM32 world ;-)

Figure 3.10: The STM32CubeProgrammer interface when
                              connected to the Nucleo board
Eclipse intermezzo

Eclipse allows us to easily navigate inside the source code, without jumping between source files
manually looking for where a function is defined. For example, let us suppose that we want to
see how the function MX_GPIO_Init() is coded. To go to its definition, highlight the function call,
click with the right mouse button and select Open declaration entry, as shown in the following
image.

Alternatively, you can hold the Ctrl key down (CMD⌘ in MacOS) while clicking on the given
symbol. Moreover, it is possible to navigate through the opened source files during symbol
navigation by using the two dedicated buttons on the Eclipse Tool-bar, as shown below.

Another interesting Eclipse feature is the ability to expand complex macros. For example, click
with right mouse button on a macro and choose the entry Explore macro expansion. The
following contextual window will appear.

Sometimes, it happens that Eclipse makes a mess of its index files, and it is impossible to
navigate inside the source code. To address this issue, you can force Eclipse to rebuild its index
going to Project->C/C++ Index->Rebuild menu.
