10. Clock Tree
Almost every digital circuit needs a way to synchronize its internal circuitry or to
synchronize itself with other circuits. A clock is a device that generates periodic
signals, and it is the most widespread form of heartbeat source in digital
electronics.

The same clock signal, however, cannot be used to feed all components and
peripherals provided by a modern microcontroller like STM32 ones. Moreover,
power consumption is a critical aspect directly connected with the clock speed
of a given peripheral. Having the ability to selectively disable or reduce the
clock speed of some MCU parts allows to optimize the overall device power
consumption. This requires that the clock is organized in a hierarchical structure,
giving to the developer the possibility to choose different speeds and clock
sources.

This chapter gives a brief introduction to the complex clock distribution network
of an STM32 MCU. Its intent is to provide to the reader necessary tools to
understand and manage the clock tree, showing the main functionalities of the
HAL_RCC module. This chapter will be further completed with Chapter 19
dedicated to the power management.

10.1 Clock Distribution
The clock is a device that usually generates a square wave signal, with a 50%
duty cycle, as the one shown in Figure 10.154.

Figure 10.1: A typical clock signal with a 50%
                                        duty cycle

A clock signal oscillates between      and    voltage levels, which for STM32
microcontrollers are a fraction of the VDD supply voltage. The most fundamental
parameter of a clock is the frequency, which indicates how many times it
switches from     to      in a second. The frequency is expressed in Hertz.

The majority of STM32 MCUs55 can be clocked by two distinct clock sources
alternatively: an internal RC oscillator (named High Speed Internal (HSI)) or an
external dedicated crystal oscillator (named High Speed External (HSE)). There
are several reasons to prefer an external crystal to the internal RC oscillator:

     An external crystal offers a higher precision compared to the internal RC
     network, which is rated of a 1% accuracy56, especially when PCB
     operative temperatures are far from the ambient temperature of 25°C.
     Some peripherals, especially high-speed ones, can be clocked only by a
     dedicated external crystal running at a given frequency.

Together with the high-speed oscillator57, another clock source can be used to
bias the low-speed oscillator, which in turn can be clocked by an external crystal
(named Low Speed External (LSE)) or the internal dedicated RC oscillator
(named Low Speed Internal (LSI)). The low-speed oscillator is used to drive the
Real Time Clock (RTC) and the Independent Watchdog (IWDT) peripheral.

The frequency of the high-speed oscillator does not establish the actual frequency
neither of the Cortex-M core nor of the other peripherals. A complex distribution
network, also called clock tree, is responsible for the propagation of the clock
signal inside an STM32 MCU. Using several programmable Phase-Locked
Loops (PLL) and prescalers, it is possible to increase/decrease the source
frequency at needs (see Figure 10.2), depending on the performances we want to
reach, the maximum speed for a given peripheral or bus and the overall global
power consumption58.

Figure 10.2: How the source clock signal frequency is
                     increased/decreased using PLLs and prescalers

10.1.1 Overview of the STM32 Clock Tree
The clock tree of an STM32 MCU can have a really articulated structure. Even in
“simpler” STM32F0 MCUs, the internal clock network can have up to four
PLL/prescaler stages, and the System Clock Multiplexer (also known as System
Clock Switch (SW)) can be fed by several alternate sources.

Table 10.1: The maximum clock speeds for AHB, APB1 and APB2
               buses of the MCUs equipping Nucleo boards used in this text

Moreover, explaining in depth the clock tree of every STM32 family is a
complex task, which also requires we focus our attention on a specific part
number. This because the clock tree structure is affected mainly by the following
key aspects:

     The STM32 main family of the microcontroller. For example, all
     STM32F0 MCUs provide just one peripheral bus (APB1), which can be
     clocked at the same Cortex-M core maximum frequency. Other STM32
     microcontrollers usually provide two peripheral buses, and only one of
     these (APB2) can reach the maximum CPU clock speed. Instead, none of the
     peripheral buses available in an STM32F7 microcontroller can reach the
     maximum core frequency59, while both APB1 and ABP2 in an STM32G4
     MCU can reach the maximum core clock speed. Table 10.1 reports the
     maximum clock speed for AHB, APB1 and APB2 buses (with related
     timers clock speed) of the MCUs equipping the Nucleo boards used as test
     board in this book: you can note that for the “old” STM32F103 it is
     possible to reach the maximum clock speed just using an external HSE
     oscillator.
     The type and number of peripherals provided by the MCU. The
     complexity of the clock tree increases with the number of available
     peripherals. Moreover, some peripherals require dedicated clock sources
     and speeds, which impact on the number of PLL stages.
     The sales type and package of the MCU, which determines the effective
     type and number of provided peripherals.

Even restricting our focus only on the nine MCUs equipping the Nucleo boards,
this would require a long and tedious work, which involve a deep knowledge of
all peripherals implemented by the given MCU. For these reasons, we will give
a quick overview to the STM32 clock tree, leaving to the reader the
responsibility to deepen the particular MCU he is considering. Moreover, as we
will see in a while, thanks to CubeMX it is possible to abstract from the specific
clock tree implementation, unless we need to deal with specific PLL
configurations for performance and power management reasons.

Figure 10.3: The clock tree of an STM32F030R8 MCU

Figure 10.3 shows the clock tree of one of the simplest STM32
microcontrollers: the STM32F030R8. It is extracted from the related reference
manual provided by ST. For a lot of novices of the STM32 platform that figure is
completely meaningless and quite hard to decode, especially if they are also new
to embedded microcontrollers. The most relevant path has been outlined in red:
the one that goes from the HSI oscillator to the Cortex-M0 core, AHB bus and
DMA. This is the path we have “used” since here silently, without dealing too
much with its possible configurations. Let us introduce the most relevant parts of
that path.

The path starts from the internal 8MHz oscillator. As said before, it is an RC
oscillator factory-calibrated by ST for 1% accuracy at an ambient temperature of
25 °C. The HSI clock can then be used to feed the System Clock Switch (SW) as
is (path highlighted in blue in Figure 10.3) or it can be used to feed the PLL
multiplier after it has been divided by two thanks to an intermediate prescaler60.
The main PLL so can multiply the 4MHz clock up to 12 times to obtain the
maximum System Clock Frequency (SYSCLK) of 48MHz. The SYSCLK source
can be used to feed the I2C1 peripheral (in alternative to the HSI) and another
intermediate prescaler, the AHB prescaler, which can be used to lower the High
(speed) Clock (HCLK), which in turn biases the AHB bus, the core and the
SysTimer.

       Why So Many Intermediate PLL/Prescaler Stages?
       As said before, the clock speed determines the overall performances, but it also affects the total
       power consumption of the MCU. Having the capability to selectively turn ON/OFF - or reduce the
       clock speed - of some parts of the MCU gives the possibility to reduce the power consumption
       according to the effective computing power needed. As we will see in Chapter 19, L0/1/4/5 MCUs
       introduce even more PLL/prescaler stages to offer to developers more control on the overall MCU
       consumption. Together with a dedicated hardware design, this allows to create battery-powered
       devices that can be run even for years using the same battery.

The clock tree configuration is performed through a dedicated peripheral61
named Reset and Clock Control (RCC), and it is a process essentially composed
by three steps:

  1. The high-speed oscillator source is selected (HSI or HSE) and properly
     configured, if the HSE is used.62
  2. If we want to feed the SYSCLK with a frequency higher than the one
     provided by the high-speed oscillator, then we need to configure the main
     PLL (which provides the PLLCLK signal). Otherwise, we can skip this
     step.
  3. The System Clock Switch (SW) is configured choosing the right clock
     source (HSI, HSE, or PLLCLK). Then we select the right AHB, APB1 and
     APB2 (if available) prescaler settings to reach the wanted frequency of the
     High-speed clock (HCLK - that is the one that feeds the core, DMAs and
     AHB bus), and the frequencies of Advanced Peripheral Bus 1 (APB1) and
     APB2 (if available) buses.

Knowing the admissible values for PLLs and prescalers can be a nightmare,
especially for more complex STM32 MCUs. Only some combinations are valid
for a given STM32 microcontroller, and their improper configuration could
potentially damage the MCU or at least cause malfunctions (a wrong clock
configuration could lead to abnormal behavior, strange and unpredictable resets
and so on). Luckily for us, the STM32 engineers have provided a great tool to
simplify the clock configuration: CubeMX.

10.1.1.1 The Multispeed Internal RC Oscillator in STM32L/U Families

The clock source and its distribution network have a non-negligible impact on
the overall power consumption of the MCU. If we need a SYSCLK frequency
higher or lower than the internal HSI clock source (which is 8MHz for the most
of STM32 MCUs and 16MHz for some others), we have to increase/reduce it by
using the PLL Source Mux and intermediate prescalers. Unfortunately, these
components consume energy, and this can have a dramatic impact on battery-
powered devices.

Table 10.2: A comparison between clock sources in an
                                     STM32L476 MCU
STM32L/U MCUs are explicitly designed for low-power applications, and they
address this specific issue by supplying a dedicated internal clock source, named
MultiSpeed Internal (MSI) RC oscillator. MSI is a low-power RC oscillator,
with a ±1%@25°C factory pre-calibrated accuracy, which can increase up to
±3% in the 0-85°C range. The main characteristic of the MSI is that it supplies
up to twelve different frequencies, without adding any external component. For
example, the MSI in an STM32L476 provides an internal clock source ranging
from 100kHz up to 48MHz. The MSI clock is used as SYSCLK after restart from
Reset, wakeup from Standby and Shutdown low-power modes. After restart from
Reset, the MSI frequency is set to its default (for example, the default MSI
frequency in an STM32L476 is 4MHz). Table 10.2 summarizes the most relevant
characteristics of all possible clock sources in an STM32L476 MCU. As you can
see, the best power consumption is achieved while the MCU is clocked by the
MSI (without using the PLL Multiplexer). Moreover, this clock source
guarantees the shortest startup time, if compared with the HSI. It is interesting to
see that up to two seconds are required to stabilize the LSE clock: if startup
speed is really important for your application, then using a separated thread63 to
start the LSE is an option to consider.

In addition to the advantages related to low-power, when the MSI is used as
source for the PLL Source Mux it provides a very accurate clock source which
can be used by the USB OTG FS device without using an external dedicated
crystal, while feeding the main PLL to run the system at the maximum speed.

10.1.2 Configuring Clock Tree Using CubeMX

We have already encountered in Chapter 4 the CubeMX Clock Configuration
view. Now it is the right time to see how it works. The Figure 10.4 shows the
clock tree of the same F0 MCU seen so far. As you can see, thanks to the more
room available on the screen, the distribution network looks less cumbersome.
Figure 10.4: How the clock tree of an STM32F030R8 MCU is
                                 represented in CubeMX

Even in this case, the most relevant paths of the clock tree have been highlighted
in red and blue. This should simplify the comparison with the Figure 10.3. When
a new project is created, by default CubeMX chooses the HSI oscillator as
default clock source. HSI is also chosen as default clock source for the System
Clock Mux64 (path in blue), as shown in Figure 10.4. This means that, for the
MCU we are considering here, the Cortex-M core frequency will be equal to
8MHz.

CubeMX also advises us about two things: the maximum frequency for the High
(speed) Clock (HCLK) and the APB1 bus is equal to 48MHz in this MCU (labels
in blue). To increase the CPU core frequency, we first need to select the
PLLCLK as the source clock for the System Clock Switch and then choose the
right PLL multiplier factor. However, CubeMX offers a quick way to do this: you
can simply write “48” inside the HCLK field and hit the enter key. CubeMX will
automatically arrange the settings, choosing the right clock tree path (the red one
in Figure 10.4)

If your board relies on an external HSE/LSE crystal, you have to enable it in the
RCC peripheral before you can use it as main clock source for the corresponding
oscillator (we will see in a while how to do this step-by-step). Once the external
oscillator is enabled, it is possible to specify its frequency (inside the blue box
labeled “input frequency”) and to configure the main PLL to achieve the desired
SYSCLK speed (see Figure 10.5). Otherwise, the external oscillator input
frequency can be used directly as source clock for the System Clock Switch.

Figure 10.5: CubeMX allow to select the
                         HSE oscillator once it is enabled using the
                                      RCC peripheral

We need to configure the RCC peripheral accordingly to enable an external clock
source. This can be done from the Pinout view in CubeMX, as shown in Figure
10.6.

Figure 10.6: The configuration options provided by the RCC peripheral

For both HSE and LSE oscillators, CubeMX offers three configuration options:

     Disable: the external oscillator is not available/used, and the corresponding
     internal oscillator is used.
     Crystal/Ceramic Resonator: an external crystal/ceramic resonator is used,
     and the corresponding main frequency is derived from it. This implies that
     RCC_OSC_IN and RCC_OSC_OUT pins are used to interface the HSE,
     and the corresponding signal I/Os are unavailable for other usages (if we
     are using an external low-speed crystal, then the corresponding
     RCC_OSC32_IN and RCC_OSC32_OUT I/Os are used too).
     BYPASS Clock Source: an external clock source is used. The clock source
     is generated by another active device. This means that the RCC_OSC_OUT
     is leaved unused, and it is possible to use it as regular GPIO. In almost all
     development board from ST (included the Nucleo ones) the Master Clock
     Output (MCO) pin of the ST-LINK interface is used as external clock
     source for the target STM32 MCU. Enabling this option allows to use the
     ST-LINK MCO as HSE.

The RCC peripheral also allows to enable the Master Clock Output (MCO),
which is a pin that can be used to clock another external device, allowing to save
on the external crystal for this other IC. Once the MCO is enabled, it is possible
to choose its clock source using the Clock Configuration view, as shown in
Figure 10.7.

Figure 10.7: How to select the clock
                               source for the MCO pin

10.1.3 Clock Source Options in Nucleo Boards

The Nucleo-64 development boards offer several alternatives for the clock
sources. However, there is a strong distinction between the early Nucleo-64
boards and the more recent ones that are based on different board layout and the
more recent ST-LINK v3 debugger.

To understand which Nucleo-64 release you have, it is important to check the
board release number. The early releases were based on the MB1136 design.
The newer ones are based on the MB1367 one. This information is usually
reported on the PCB (by using a label on the back on older Nucleo), as shown in
Figure 10.8.
Figure 10.8: The Nucleo-64 PCB
                                      revision number

10.1.3.1 Clock Source in Nucleo-64 rev. MB1136 (older ones with ST-LINK V2.1)

10.1.3.1.1 OSC Clock Supply

There are four ways to configure the pins corresponding to external high-speed
clock external high-speed clock (HSE):

      MCO from ST-LINK: MCO output of ST-LINK MCU is used as input
      clock. This frequency cannot be changed, it is fixed at 8 MHz and connected
      to PF0/PD0/PH0-OSC_IN of target STM32 MCU.
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB55 OFF
           SB16 and SB50 ON
           R35 and R37 removed
      HSE oscillator on-board from X3 crystal (not provided): for typical
      frequencies and its capacitors and resistors, refer to STM32
      microcontroller datasheet. Please refer to the AN2867 for oscillator design
      guide for STM32 microcontrollers.
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB54 and SB55 OFF
           R35 and R37 soldered
           C33 and C34 soldered
           SB16 and SB50 OFF
      Oscillator from external PF0/PD0/PH0: from an external oscillator
      through pin 29 of the CN7 connector.
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB55 ON
           SB50 OFF
           R35 and R37 removed
      HSE not used: PF0/PD0/PH1 and PF1/PD1/PH1 are used as GPIO instead
      of Clock
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB54 and SB55 ON
           SB16 and SB50 (MCO) OFF
           R35 and R37 removed

There are two possible default configurations of the HSE pins depending on the
version of NUCLEO board hardware. The board version MB1136 C-01/02/03 is
mentioned on sticker placed on bottom side of the PCB.

      The board marking MB1136 C-01 corresponds to a board, configured for
      HSE not used.
      The board marking MB1136 C-02 (or higher) corresponds to a board,
      configured to use STLINK MCO as clock input.

          Read Carefully

          For Nucleo-L476RG the ST-LINK MCO output is not connected to OSCIN, to reduce power
          consumption in low power mode. Consequently, the HSE in a Nucleo-L476RG cannot be used
          unless an external crystal is mounted on X3 pad, as described before.

10.1.3.1.2 OSC 32kHz Clock Supply

There are three ways to configure the pins corresponding to low-speed clock
(LSE):

      On-board oscillator: X2 crystal. Please refer to the AN2867 for oscillator
      design guide for STM32 microcontrollers.
      Oscillator from external PC14: from external oscillator through the pin 25
      of CN7 connector.
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB48 and SB49 ON
           R34 and R36 removed
      LSE not used: PC14 and PC15 are used as GPIOs instead of low-speed
      Clock.
      The following configuration is needed:
           SB48 and SB49 ON
           R34 and R36 removed

There are two possible default configurations of the LSE depending on the
version of NUCLEO board hardware. The board version MB1136 C-01/02/03 is
mentioned on sticker placed on bottom side of the PCB.

      The board marking MB1136 C-01 corresponds to a board configured as
      LSE not used.
      The board marking MB1136 C-02 (or higher) corresponds to a board
      configured with onboard 32kHz oscillator.
      The board marking MB1136 C-03 (or higher) corresponds to a board using
      new LSE crystal (ABS25) and C26, C31 & C32 value update.

          Read Carefully

          All Nucleo boards with a release version equal to MB1136 C-02 have a severe issue with the
          values of the dumping resistor R34, R36 and with the capacitors C26, C31 & C32. This issue
          prevents the LSE to start correctly.

10.1.3.2 Clock Source in Nucleo-64 rev. MB1367 (newer ones with ST-LINK v3)

10.1.3.2.1 OSC Clock Supply

There are four ways to configure the pins corresponding to external high-speed
clock external high-speed clock (HSE):

      MCO from ST-LINK: MCO output of ST-LINK is used as input clock. This
      frequency cannot be changed, it is fixed at 8 MHz or 8.33MHz65 and
      connected to the PF0-OSC_IN of the STM32 microcontroller. The
      configuration must be:
           SB27 ON
           SB25 and SB26 OFF
           SB24 and SB28 OFF
      HSE on-board oscillator from X3 crystal (default): for typical
      frequencies and its capacitors and resistors, refer to the STM32
      microcontroller datasheet and to the Oscillator design guide for STM8S,
      STM8A and STM32 microcontrollers Application note (AN2867) for the
      oscillator design guide. It is recommended to use a crystal with these
      characteristics: 24 MHz, 6 pF load capacitance, 20 ppm. The configuration
      must be:
           SB25 and SB26 ON
           SB24 and SB28 OFF
           SB27 OFF
           C56 and C59 soldered with 6.8 pF capacitors
      Oscillator from external PF0: from an external oscillator through the pin
      29 of the CN7 connector. The configuration must be:
           SB28 ON
           SB24 OFF
           SB25 and SB26 OFF
           SB27 OFF
      HSE not used: PF0 and PF1 are used as GPIOs instead of as clock. The
      configuration must be:
           SB24 and SB28 ON
           SB27 OFF
           SB25 and SB26 OFF

10.1.3.2.2 OSC 32kHz Clock Supply

There are three ways to configure the pins corresponding to low-speed clock
(LSE):

      On-board oscillator (default): X2 crystal. Refer to the Oscillator design
      guide for STM8S, STM8A and STM32 microcontrollers application note
      (AN2867). It is recommended to use a crystal with these characteristics:
      32.768 kHz, 6 pF load capacitance, 20 ppm. The configuration must be:
           SB30 and SB31 ON
           SB29 and SB32 OFF
      Oscillator from external PC14: from external oscillator through the pin 25
      of CN7 connector. The configuration must be:
          SB29 and SB32 ON
          SB30 and SB31 OFF
     LSE not used: PC14 and PC15 are used as GPIOs instead of low-speed
     clock. The configuration must be:
          SB29 and SB32 ON
          SB30 and SB31 OFF

10.2 Overview of the HAL_RCC Module
So far we have seen that the Reset and Clock Control (RCC) peripheral is
responsible of the configuration for the whole clock tree of an STM32 MCU. The
HAL_RCC module contains the corresponding descriptors and routines of the
CubeHAL to abstract from the specific RCC implementation. However, the
actual implementation of this module inevitably reflects the peculiarities of the
clock tree in a given STM32-series and part number. Deepening this module, as
we have done for other HAL modules, is outside the scope of this book. It would
require we keep track of too many differences among the several STM32
microcontrollers. So, we will now give a brief overview to its main features and
to the steps involved during the configuration of the clock tree.

The most relevant C struct to configure the clock tree are
RCC_OscInitTypeDef and RCC_ClkInitTypeDef. The first one is used to
configure the RCC internal/external oscillator sources (HSE, HSI, LSE, LSI),
plus some additional clock sources if provided by the MCU. For example, some
STM32 MCUs from the F0 series (STM32F07x, STM32F0x2 and STM32F09x
ones) provide USB 2.0 support, in addition to an internal dedicated and factory-
calibrated high-speed oscillator running at 48MHz to bias the USB peripheral. If
this is the case, the RCC_OscInitTypeDef struct is also used to configure
those additional clock sources. The RCC_OscInitTypeDef struct also has a
field that is instance of the RCC_PLLInitTypeDef struct, which configures the
main PLL used to increase the speed of the source clock. It reflects the hardware
structure of the main PLL and can be composed by several fields depending on
the STM32 series (in STM32F2/4/7 MCUs it can have a quite complex
structure).

The RCC_ClkInitTypeDef struct, instead, is used to configure the source
clock for the System Clock Switch (SWCLK), for the AHB bus and the APB1/2
buses.
CubeMX is designed to generate the right code initialization for the clock tree of
our MCU. All the necessary code is packed inside the SystemClock_Config()
routine, which we have encountered in the projects generated until now. For
example, the following implementation of the SystemClock_Config() reflects
the clock tree configuration for an STM32F030R8 MCU running at 48MHz:
 1 void SystemClock_Config(void) {
 2   RCC_OscInitTypeDef RCC_OscInitStruct;
 3   RCC_ClkInitTypeDef RCC_ClkInitStruct;
 4
 5   RCC_OscInitStruct.OscillatorType = RCC_OSCILLATORTYPE_HSI;
 6   RCC_OscInitStruct.HSIState = RCC_HSI_ON;
 7   RCC_OscInitStruct.HSICalibrationValue = 16;
 8   RCC_OscInitStruct.PLL.PLLState = RCC_PLL_ON;
 9   RCC_OscInitStruct.PLL.PLLSource = RCC_PLLSOURCE_HSI;
10   RCC_OscInitStruct.PLL.PLLMUL = RCC_PLL_MUL12;
11   RCC_OscInitStruct.PLL.PREDIV = RCC_PREDIV_DIV1;
12   HAL_RCC_OscConfig(&RCC_OscInitStruct);
13
14   RCC_ClkInitStruct.ClockType = RCC_CLOCKTYPE_SYSCLK;
15   RCC_ClkInitStruct.SYSCLKSource = RCC_SYSCLKSOURCE_PLLCLK;
16   RCC_ClkInitStruct.AHBCLKDivider = RCC_SYSCLK_DIV1;
17   RCC_ClkInitStruct.APB1CLKDivider = RCC_HCLK_DIV1;
18   HAL_RCC_ClockConfig(&RCC_ClkInitStruct, FLASH_LATENCY_1);
19
20   HAL_SYSTICK_Config(HAL_RCC_GetHCLKFreq()/1000);
21
22   HAL_SYSTICK_CLKSourceConfig(SYSTICK_CLKSOURCE_HCLK);
23
24   /* SysTick_IRQn interrupt configuration */
25   HAL_NVIC_SetPriority(SysTick_IRQn, 0, 0);
26 }

Lines [5:12] select the HSI as source oscillator and enable the main PLL, setting
the HSI as its clock source through the PLL multiplexer. The clock frequency is
then increased by twelve times (settings the PLLMUL field). Lines [14:18] set the
SYSCLK frequency. The PLLCLK is selected as clock source (line 15). In the
same way, the SYSCLK frequency is selected as source for the AHB bus, and the
same HCLK frequency (RCC_HCLK_DIV1) as source for the APB1 bus. The other
lines of code set the SysTick timer, a special timer available in the Cortex-M
core used to synchronize some internal HAL activities (or to drive the scheduler
of an RTOS, as we will see in Chapter 23). The HAL is based on the convention
that SysTick timer generates an interrupt ever 1ms. Since we are configuring the
SysTick clock so that it runs at the maximum core frequency of 48MHz (which
means that the SYSCLK performs 48.000.000 clock cycles every second), we
can set the SysTick timer so that it generates an interrupt every 48.000.000
cycles/1000ms = 48.000 clock cycles 66.
10.2.1 Compute the Clock Frequency at Run-Time

Sometimes it is important to know how fast is running the CPU core. If our
firmware is designed so that it always runs at an established frequency, we can
easily hardcode that value in the firmware using a symbolic constant. However,
this is always a poor programming style, and it is totally inapplicable if we
manage the CPU frequency dynamically. The CubeHAL provides a function that
can be used to compute the SYSCLK frequency: the
HAL_RCC_GetSysClockFreq()67. However, this function must be handled with
special care. Let us see why.

The HAL_RCC_GetSysClockFreq() does not return the real SYSCLK frequency
(it could never do this in a reliable way without having a known and precise
external reference), but it bases the result on the following algorithm:

     if SYSCLK source is the HSI oscillator, then returns the value based on the
     HSI_VALUE macro;
     if SYSCLK source is the HSE oscillator, then returns the value based on the
     HSE_VALUE macro;
     if SYSCLK source is the PLLCLK, then returns a value based on
     HSI_VALUE/HSE_VALUE multiplied by the PLL factor, according to the
     specific STM32 MCU implementation.

HSI_VALUE and HSE_VALUE macros are defined inside the stm32xxx_hal_conf.h
file, and they are hardcoded values. The HSI_VALUE is defined by ST during
chip design, and we can trust the value of the corresponding macro (except for
that 1% of accuracy). Instead, if we are using an external oscillator as HSE
source, we must provide the actual value for the HSE_VALUE macro, otherwise
the value returned by the HAL_RCC_GetSysClockFreq() function is wrong68.
And this also affects the tick frequency (that is, how long it takes to generate the
timer interrupt) of the SysTick timer.

We can also retrieve the core frequency by using the SystemCoreClock CMSIS
global variable.
        Read Carefully

        If we decide to manipulate the clock tree configuration by hand without using CubeHAL routines,
        we have to remember that every time we change the SYSCLK frequency, we need to call the
        CMSIS function SystemCoreClockUpdate(), otherwise some CMSIS routines may give wrong
        results. This function is automatically called for us by the HAL_RCC_ClockConfig() routine.

10.2.2 Enabling the Master Clock Output

As said before, depending on the IC package used, STM32 MCUs allow to route
the clock signal to one or two output I/Os, called Master Clock Output (MCO).
This is performed by using the function:
void HAL_RCC_MCOConfig(uint32_t RCC_MCOx, uint32_t RCC_MCOSource, uint32_t
RCC_MCODiv);

For example, to route the PLLCLK to MCO1 pin in an STM32F401RE MCU
(which corresponds to PA8 pin), we must invoke the above function in the
following way:
HAL_RCC_MCOConfig(RCC_MCO1, RCC_MCO1SOURCE_PLLCLK, RCC_MCODIV_1);

        Read Carefully
        Please, take note that when configuring the MCO pin as output GPIO, its speed (that is, the slew
        rate) affects the quality of the output clock. Moreover, for higher clock frequencies the
        compensation cell must be enabled in the following way:

        HAL_EnableCompensationCell();

        Refer to the datasheet of your MCU for more about this.

10.2.3 Enabling the Clock Security System
The Clock Security System (CSS) is a feature of the RCC peripheral used to
detect malfunctions of the external HSE. The CSS is an important feature in some
critical applications, where a malfunction of the HSE could cause injuries to the
user. Its importance is proven by the fact that the detection of a failure is noticed
through the NMI exception, a Cortex-M exception that cannot be disabled.

When the failure of HSE is detected, the MCU automatically switch to the HSI
clock, which is selected as source for the SYSCLK clock. So, if a higher core
frequency is needed, we need to perform proper initializations inside the NMI
exception handler.

To enable the CSS we use the HAL_RCC_EnableCSS() routine, and we need to
define the handler for the NMI exception in the following way69:
void NMI_Handler(void) {
  HAL_RCC_NMI_IRQHandler();
}

The right way to catch the failure of the HSE clock is by defining the callback:
void HAL_RCC_CSSCallback(void) {
        //Catch the HSE failure and take proper actions
}

10.3 HSI Calibration
We have left uncommented one line of code in the SystemClock_Config()
routine seen before: the instruction at line 7. It used to perform a fine-tune
calibration of the HSI oscillator. But what exactly it does?

As said before, the frequency of the internal RC oscillators may vary from one
chip to another due to manufacturing process variations. For this reason, HSI
oscillators are factory-calibrated by ST to have a 1% accuracy at room
temperature. After a reset, the factory calibration value is automatically loaded
in the second byte (HSICAL) of the RCC configuration register (RCC_CR) (the
Figure 10.9 shows the implementation of this register in an STM32F401RE70).
Figure 10.9: The RCC_CR register in an STM32F401RE MCU

The frequency of the internal RC oscillator can be fine-tuned to achieve better
accuracy with wider temperature and supply voltage ranges. The trimming bits
are used for this purpose. Five trimming bits RCC_CR->HSITRIM[4:0] are used
for fine-tuning. The default trimming value is 16. An increase/decrease in this
trimming value causes an increase/decrease in HSI frequency. The HSI oscillator
is fine-tuned in steps of 0.5% of the HSI clock speed:

     Writing a trimming value in the range of 17 to 31 increases the HSI
     frequency.
     Writing a trimming value in the range of 0 to 15 decreases the HSI
     frequency.
     Writing a trimming value equal to 16 causes the HSI frequency to keep its
     default value.

The HSI can be calibrated using the following procedure:

  1. set the internal high-speed RC oscillator system clock;
  2. measure the internal RC oscillator frequency for each trimming value;
  3. compute the frequency error for each trimming value (according to a known
     reference);
  4. finally, set the trimming bits with the optimum value (corresponding to the
     lowest frequency error).

The internal oscillator frequency is not measured directly but it is computed from
the number of clock pulses counted using a timer compared with the typical
value. To do this, a very accurate reference frequency must be available such as
the LSE frequency provided by the external 32.768 kHz crystal or the 50 Hz/60
Hz of the mains.

ST provides several application notes describing better this procedure (for
example, the AN4067 is about the calibration procedure in the STM32F0
family). Please, refer to those documents for more information.
