21. Flash Memory Management
Flash memory is a silent peripheral that we use without worrying too much about
it. Once we are sure that the flash has sufficient room to store the firmware, we
upload the binary image using the debugger or a dedicated flashing tool. And we
completely forget it.

However, the internal flash provided by all STM32 microcontrollers works in
the same way of other peripherals. It can be programmed directly from the
firmware by configuring specific registers, and this allows us to upgrade the
firmware using the same on-board code or to store relevant configuration data
without using dedicated external hardware (an external I²C EEPROM or an SPI
flash).

This chapter shows how to program the internal STM32 flash memory using the
dedicated HAL_FLASH module from the CubeHAL. It describes how the flash is
usually organized in a typical STM32 microcontroller, briefly illustrating the
differences among each family and the steps involved to program specific areas
of this memory directly from the same microcontroller.

Finally, the role of the ART™ Accelerator is described, together with the
evolutions of this ST proprietary technology in STM32F7 microcontrollers.

21.1 Introduction to STM32 Flash Memory

Different from other embedded architectures40, all STM32 microcontrollers
provide a dedicated flash memory to store program code and constant data.
There are currently eleven memory sizes, ranging from 16KB up to 2MB. The
last digit of the part number of a given STM32 MCU defines the size of the flash
memory, as shown in Table 21.1. For example, an STM32F401RE MCU has
512KB of flash memory.
Table 21.1: The size of the flash memory given
                       the last digit in an STM32 part number
                   Last digit in      Flash memory size
                   P/N                (KB)
                   4                  16
                   6                  32
                   8                  64
                   B                  128
                   Z                  192
                   C                  256
                   D                  384
                   E                  512
                   F                  768
                   G                  1024
                   H                  1536
                   I                  2048

Depending on the STM32 family, sales type and packaged used, the flash memory
of an STM32 MCU can be organized in:

    one or two banks: the majority of STM32 microcontrollers provide just
    one bank of flash memory, while the most performing ones up to two banks.
    The multi-bank architecture allows dual and simultaneous operations:
    while programming or erasing in one bank, read operations are possible in
    the other one. This approach provides higher flexibility for dual operations
    especially for high performance applications. In some more recent STM32
    MCUs multi-bank is a programmable feature that can be optionally enabled,
    and the bank sizes can be configured at need.
    each bank is in turn divided in sectors: each flash memory bank is
    partitioned in several sub-blocks, called sectors. Some STM32 MCUs
    provide flash memory having all sectors with the same size (usually equal
    to 1KB or 2KB). Some other ones provide several sectors with different
    sizes (usually the first sectors have a smaller size than the remaining ones).
    each sector can be divided in pages: in some STM32 MCUs, a sector is
    further partitioned in several smaller pages. Sometimes, this happens only
    for the first sector, and this allows erasing and then programming only a
    fraction of the sector.
Table 21.241 shows how the flash memory is organized in some STM32F0
microcontrollers. As you can see, they can provide up to seventeen sectors, each
one in turn divided in four pages. Moreover, a dedicated area, called
Information Block, is mapped to another address range: this non-volatile
memory is used to store special configuration registers (named Option bytes)
and some factory pre-programmed bootloaders, which we will study in the next
Chapter. In more powerful STM32 MCUs, the Information Block region also
contains the One-time Programmable (OTP) memory (which can range from 512
up to 1024 bytes): this is a non-volatile memory that can be used to store relevant
configuration parameters of the device.

Why having such memory organization? Before we can answer to this question,
we need to introduce some fundamental concepts regarding flash memory
technologies. Without detailing it too much, there are two main families of flash
memories: NAND and NOR.

NAND-flash memories offer a more compact physical architecture, allowing to
store more memory cell in the same silicon area. NAND memories are available
in greater storage densities and at lower costs per bit than NOR-flash (remember
that in electronics, apart from the R&D costs, the production cost of an IC is all
about the die size). NAND memories also have up to ten times the endurance of
NOR-flash. NAND is more fit as storage media for large files including video
and audio. The USB thumb drives, SD cards and MMC cards are of NAND type.
Table 21.2: Flash memory organization in F030x4, F030x6, F070x6
                                  and F030x8 devices

NAND-flash does not provide a random-access external address bus so the data
must be read on a block-wise basis, where each block holds hundreds to
thousands of bits, resembling to a kind of sequential data access. This makes
NAND-flash technology not suitable for embedded microcontrollers, because
most of the microprocessors and microcontrollers require byte-level random
access.

An important thing to know about flash memory technologies is that a write
operation in any type of flash device can only be performed on an empty or
erased unit. So, in most cases a write operation must be preceded by an erase
operation. While the erase operation is straightforward in the case of NAND-
flash devices, in NOR-flash it is mandatory that all bytes in the target block
should be written with all zeros before they can be erased. Conversely, NOR-
flash memories offer complete address and data buses to randomly access any of
its memory location (addressable to every byte). This makes them suitable for
store code and constant data because they rarely need to be updated.
NOR memories endurance is 10,000 to 100,000 erase cycles. NOR-flash
memories are slower in erase-operation and write-operation compared to
NAND-flash. That means the NAND-flash has faster erase and write times.
Moreover, NAND has smaller erase units. So, fewer erases are needed, and this
makes them more suitable to store filesystems. NOR-flash can read data slightly
faster than NAND.

NOR-flash devices are divided into erase units, also called blocks, pages or
sectors. This division is necessary to reduce prices and overcome physical
limitations. Writing information to a specific block can only be performed if that
block is empty/erased, as said before. In the majority of NOR-flash memories,
after an erase cycle an individual cell contains the value “1”, and a write
operation allows to change its value to “0”. This means that a word memory
location is set to 0xFFFF FFFF after an erase. There exists, however, some
NOR-flash memories where the cell-default value after an erase is “0”, and we
can set it to “1” with a write operation.

Partitioning the flash memory in several blocks gives us an indirect advantage:
we can erase and then reprogram only small fractions of the flash memory. This
is especially useful when we use the flash memory to store non-volatile
configuration parameters, without using dedicated and external EEPROM
memories42.

To completely avoid unwanted writings in the Non-Volatile Memory (NVM), the
flash memory in all STM32 MCUs is write protected, and there exists a specific
unlocking sequence to follow to disable it: two dedicated key registers are
provided in the Option Bytes region, which allow to disable flash writing
protection by issuing a specific value inside them. In some STM32 MCUs the
write protection must be individually disabled for each sector. Depending on the
STM32 family, the write access is performed by 8-, 16-, 32- or 64-bit.

To protect the intellectual property, the flash memory can be read-protected
against external access from debug interface (clearly, the read access is still
permitted from the Cortex-M core and DMA controllers). This avoids other
malicious users can save the content of flash memory to disassemble or replicate
it on counterfeit devices43. We will analyze this topic later.

Depending on the STM32 family, the flash memory can perform several
program/erase operations in parallel, allowing to write more bytes at once.
Particular conditions must be met to carry out program operations in parallels.
Usually, a given VDD voltage is required to reach the maximum parallelism.
Always consult the reference manual of your MCU to discover more about this.

21.2 The HAL_FLASH Module
Like all other STM32 peripherals, even the flash memory provides several
registers used to manipulate its settings, as said before. The HAL_FLASH module,
together with the related HAL_FLASHEx module, allows to easily erase and
reprogram the NVM memory without dealing too much with its implementation
details. The next subparagraphs introduce the most relevant functions from those
modules.

21.2.1 Flash Memory Unlocking

The flash memory is write-protected by default, to prevent accidental writings
caused by electrical disturbances or program malfunctions. To enable write
mode a sequence of operations must be performed, and this is specific of the
given STM32 family. To accomplish this task, the CubeHAL provides the
function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_Unlock(void);

which allows us to completely ignore the specific flash memory architecture.
Once the flash memory write/erase protection is disabled, we can perform an
erase or write operation. The reverse of the unlock procedure is performed by
using the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_Lock(void);

The write protection is automatically set upon a system reset. However, it is
strongly suggested to explicitly re-lock the memory when all writing operations
are completed. This prevents any accidental writing caused by firmware
malfunction or power instability.

21.2.2 Flash Memory Erasing

Before we can change the content of a flash memory location, we need to reset its
bits to the default value (“0” or “1” depending on the NOR-flash type). This is
performed by an erase operation on sector/page granularity. Alternatively, a mass
erase of the whole bank can be performed: this means that on those STM32
MCUs providing two banks we can mass erase each bank at a time.

In the majority of STM32 microcontrollers, the individual cells of a flash
memory block (sector or page) are set to “1” after an erase operation, with just
two notably exceptions: STM32L0 and STM32L1 microcontrollers, whose
default value is instead “0”.

The CubeHAL provides two ways to perform a flash erase operation: flash
erasing in polling and interrupt mode.

The function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASHEx_Erase(FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef *pEraseInit,
                                    uint32_t *SectorError);

allows to perform a flash erasing in polling mode. It accepts a pointer to an
instance of the FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef struct, that we are going to see in a
while, and a pointer to variable (SectorError) which returns the id of faulty
sectors/pages in case of error during the erasing procedure (for example, if the
erasing procedure fails on the 4th page, the SectorError parameter will contain
the value 3).

The FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef struct differs a lot between each STM32
family. For this reason, take a look at the stm32XXxx_hal_flash_ex.h file of
the CubeHAL for your MCU. Here, we are going to consider the implementation
found in CubeHALs for the most performing STM32 MCU like the F2/F4/F7
ones.
typedef struct {
  uint32_t TypeErase;   /* Mass erase or sector Erase */
  uint32_t Banks;       /* Select banks to erase when Mass erase is enabled */
  uint32_t Sector;      /* Initial FLASH sector to erase when Mass erase is disabled
*/
  uint32_t NbSectors;   /* Number of sectors to be erased */
  uint32_t VoltageRange;/* The device voltage range which defines the erase
parallelism */
} FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef;

     TypeErase: specifies if we are performing a mass erase of the whole bank
     or a sector/page erasing. It can assume the values
     FLASH_TYPEERASE_SECTORS or FLASH_TYPEERASE_MASSERASE.
     Banks: this parameter, which is available only in those STM32-series
     providing a multi-bank internal flash memory, specifies the bank involved in
     a mass-erase. It can assume the values FLASH_BANK_1, FLASH_BANK_2 or
     FLASH_BANK_BOTH to delete both the banks.
     Sector(Page): this field refers to the sector id involved in a sector-based
     erasing. It can assume the value FLASH_SECTOR_0, FLASH_SECTOR_1 and so
     on (the maximum number of sectors depends on the specific
     microcontroller). In those STM32 MCUs providing a flash memory with
     page granularity, this fields is replaced by the first address of the page
     involved in an erasing procedure. Consult the CubeHAL source code for
     more about this.
     NbSectors(NbPages): the number of sectors (pages) that will be erased
     starting from the specified Sector.
     VoltageRange: even if we are erasing a whole sector (or page), the erasing
     procedure cycles over a subset of it (usually two bytes). More performing
     STM32 MCUs allows to erase multiple bytes at once. This feature is called
     flash parallelism and it is related to the MCU operating voltage: the higher
     is VDD, the more bytes are erased at a time44. This field can assume a value
     from Table 21.3. However, always consult the reference manual for your
     MCU for more about this.
Table 21.3: Program/erase parallelism depending on the voltage range
VoltageRange                      Voltage range                          Parallelism
FLASH_VOLTAGE_RANGE_1             1.7 - 2.1 V                            8 bits at a time
FLASH_VOLTAGE_RANGE_2             2.1 - 2.4 V                            16 bits at a time
FLASH_VOLTAGE_RANGE_3             2.4 - 3.6 V                            32 bits at a time
FLASH_VOLTAGE_RANGE_4             2.7 - 3.6 V with External VPP          64 bits at a time

The HAL_FLASHEx_Erase() is a blocking function: it will wait until the erasing
procedure has been completed. This may be a quite “long” procedure, depending
on the STM32 family, the HCLK speed, the number of sector/pages involved in
the erasing and the VDD voltage in those STM32 MCU providing program/erase
parallelism. To avoid blocking the firmware activities during this procedure, the
HAL provides the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASHEx_Erase_IT(FLASH_EraseInitTypeDef *pEraseInit,
                                       uint32_t *SectorError);
which performs an erasing procedure in interrupt mode. We can get notified of
the end of the erasing procedure by enabling the FLASH_IRQn interrupt and
implementing the corresponding ISR.

        Read Carefully

        Special care must be placed in case we are erasing flash memory location containing program
        code, especially if we are deleting first sector/page containing the vector table (this is always true
        if we are performing a mass-erase). If this the case, then we need to move the program code and
        relocate the whole vector table inside the SRAM, as shown in Chapter 20, otherwise a fault will
        occur once the interrupt fires.

21.2.3 Flash Memory Programming

Once a sector/page is erased, we can proceed programming its content. In theory,
it is perfect possible to directly access to a flash location to change its content45
writing a C code like the following one:
...
*(volatile uint16_t*)0x0800AA00 = Data;
...

However, this is basically not convenient for two main reasons. First of all, in
some STM32 MCUs preliminary operations (like setting specific registers) may
be required before we can program a flash location. Secondly, depending on the
specific STM32-series and the VDD voltage range, the number of bytes that can
be simultaneous transferred to the flash may significantly differ. For these
reasons, the HAL defines the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_Program(uint32_t TypeProgram, uint32_t Address, uint64_t
Data);

which is designed to abstract all specific implementation details. Let us analyze
the function arguments:

     TypeProgram: it indicates how many bytes are transferred during the write
     operation, and it can assume the values FLASH_TYPEPROGRAM_HALFWORD,
     FLASH_TYPEPROGRAM_WORD and FLASH_TYPEPROGRAM_DOUBLEWORD.
     Please, take note that this parameter specifies only the amount of data
     transferred using the HAL_FLASH_Program() function. The effective number
     of bytes transferred in a single transaction depends on the STM32 family
     and the parallelism degree, if available.
     Address: it is the initial memory address where start placing content.
     Data: it is the data to store inside the flash memory location (represented as
     a double word variable).

Like for the erase procedure seen before, it is possible to perform a flash
programming procedure in interrupt mode by using the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_Program_IT(uint32_t TypeProgram,
                                       uint32_t Address, uint64_t Data);

21.2.4 Flash Read Access During Programming and Erasing

A read access to the flash memory while an erase or write operation is ongoing
will cause a bus stall, at least in the majority of STM32 microcontrollers46. This
means that if you need to carry out other operations in parallel, you need to
relocate in SRAM code to be executed during a flash programming operation. A
typical scenario is represented by a custom bootloader: we may program our
code so that we exchange the new firmware to flash using the UART in interrupt
or DMA mode. If this the case, we cannot lose asynchronous events (for example,
an interrupt that notifies us a data transfer) because the MCU is stalled waiting
for the ongoing operation. If so, it is best to relocate the code in SRAM (and
eventually to relocate the vector table too).

21.3 Option Bytes
Option bytes are two or more bytes whose bits are special configuration values.
The concept of option bytes is similar to the one found in other microcontroller
architectures, like the fuses in the AVR series from Atmel or the Configuration
Bits found in PIC microcontrollers from Microchip.

Each individual bit of these special bytes in the Information Block region has a
special meaning. The number and type of configuration parameters depend on the
specific STM32 MCU. The most common configuration parameters are related
to:
     BOOT: in the majority of STM32 microcontrollers two option bits allow to
     select the boot origin (FLASH, System memory or SRAM).
     RDP: these bits set the flash memory read-protection level, and we will
     analyze them more in depth later in this chapter.
     BOR_LEVEL: these bits contain the supply level threshold that
     activates/releases the reset. They can be written to program a new BOR
     level. By default, BOR is off. When the supply voltage (VDD) drops below
     the selected BOR level, a device reset is generated.
     MCU behavior when entering in some low-power modes: in almost all
     STM32 microcontrollers it is possible to configure the MCU so that it
     generates a reset when entering in stop or sleep low-power modes.
     Hardware watchdog: in some STM32 MCUs, there exist one or two bits
     used to configure the WWDG and IWDG in “hardware mode”, that is they
     are automatically started upon a MCU reset.
     Flash write protection: these bits allow to individually write-protect some
     flash sectors/pages, preventing from writing into them even if the flash
     memory is unlocked. If a given bit is set to ‘1’, the corresponding
     sector/page is not write-protected; if, instead, the bit is set to ‘0’, then the
     sector/page is write-protected.

To program the option bytes there is a specific procedure to follow, which is
independent from the programming of the whole flash memory. So, the CubeHAL
provides dedicated routines to use.

First of all, this region must be unlocked by calling the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_OB_Unlock(void);

Next, a give option byte is programmed entirely by using the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASHEx_OBProgram(FLASH_OBProgramInitTypeDef *pOBInit);

The value of an option byte is automatically modified by first erasing the
information block and then programming all the option bytes with the values
passed to the HAL_FLASHEx_OBProgram() routine. The function accepts an
instance of the C struct FLASH_OBProgramInitTypeDef, whose fields
represent the content of the given option byte. For more information about the
exact type and number of fields consult the source code of the CubeHAL.

Similarly, to retrieve the content of a given option byte we use the function:
void HAL_FLASHEx_OBGetConfig(FLASH_OBProgramInitTypeDef *pOBInit);

Once an option byte is modified, we have to force the MCU to reload its content
by using the function:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_FLASH_OB_Launch(void);

Please take note that changing some option bits in some STM32 MCUs may
cause a reset of the chip.

Finally, the ST STM32CubeProgrammer provides the ability to easily modify the
option bytes. Once you have connected the ST-LINK debugger to the target MCU,
click on the Option bytes icon (the third green icon on the left). The Option
bytes section appears, as shown in Figure 21.1. The same
STM32CubeProgrammer tool also allows to erase selected flash sectors/pages.

Figure 21.1: The Option Bytes configuration dialog in
                                the STM32CubeProgrammer

21.3.1 Flash Memory Read Protection
       Read Carefully

       Some procedures described in this paragraph may brick your microcontroller preventing you from
       flashing and erasing it forever. Read carefully the content of this paragraph and avoid performing
       operations if they are not totally clear.

One option byte (called RDP) deserves a separated paragraph: the configuration
byte related to the flash read protection. To avoid unwanted access to the flash
memory through the debug interface it is possible to temporarily or permanently
disable the read access to this memory from the external world (clearly, the
access from the CPU core and the DMA controllers is always possible). There
exist three protection levels, which correspond to three different values to store
in the option byte:

     Level 0 (no read protection): when the read protection level is set to
     Level 0 by writing 0xAA into the read protection option byte (RDP), all
     read/write operations (if no write protection is set) from/to the flash
     memory or the backup SRAM are possible in all boot configurations (flash
     user boot, debug or boot from RAM).
     Level 1 (read protection enabled): it is the default read protection level
     after option bytes erase (which is automatically performed by the
     HAL_FLASHEx_OBProgram() routine). The read protection Level 1 is
     activated by writing any value (except for 0xAA and 0xCC used to set
     Level 0 and Level 2, respectively) into the RDP option byte. When the
     read protection Level 1 is set, no access (read, erase, program) to flash
     memory or backup SRAM can be performed while the debugger is
     connected or while booting from RAM or system memory bootloader. A bus
     error is generated in case of read request. Instead, when booting from flash
     memory, accesses (read, erase, program) to flash memory and backup
     SRAM from user code are allowed. When Level 1 is active, programming
     the protection option byte (RDP) to Level 0 causes the flash memory and the
     backup SRAM to be mass-erased. As result, the user code area is cleared
     before the read protection is removed. The mass erase only erases the user
     code area. The other option bytes including write protections remain
     unchanged before the mass-erase operation. The OTP area is not affected by
     mass erase and remains unchanged. Mass erase is performed only when
     Level 1 is active and Level 0 requested. When the protection level is
     increased (0->1, 1->2, 0->2) there is no mass erase.
     Level 2 (!!!debug/chip read protection permanently disabled!!!): the
     read protection Level 2 is activated by writing 0xCC to the RDP option
     byte. When the read protection Level 2 is set:
          All protections provided by Level 1 are active.
          Booting from RAM is no more allowed.
          Booting system memory bootloader is possible and all the commands
          are not accessible except Get, GetID and GetVersion. Refer to
          AN2606.
          JTAG, SWV (single-wire viewer), ETM, and boundary scan are
          disabled.
          User option bytes can no longer be changed.
          When booting from Flash memory, accesses (read, erase and program)
          to Flash memory and backup SRAM from user code are allowed.

       Memory read protection Level 2 is an irreversible operation. When Level 2 is activated, the
       level of protection cannot be decreased to Level 0 or Level 1. Just to clarify once again, this
       means that you will be no longer able to flash and debug your MCU.

Table 21.4 summarizes the effects of a given protection level on:

     the flash memory;
     the option bytes and the OTP memory (when these memories are accessed
     by the debugger interface);
     the pre-programmed bootloaders;
     code placed in SRAM and in flash memory.

As you can see, the Level 2 does not prevent user code from writing into flash
memory (for example, a custom bootloader is still able to program the MCU).
Table 21.4: The effects of read protection levels on the individual
                                       NVM memories

21.4 Optional OTP and True-EEPROM Memories

More recent and powerful STM32 microcontrollers provide a One-Time
Programmable (OTP) memory. This is a dedicated memory with a size ranging
from 512 up to 1024 bytes with a unique characteristic: once a bit of this memory
turns from 1 to 0 is no longer possible to restore it to 1. This means that this
region is not erasable. This memory area is especially useful to store relevant
configuration parameters connected with the given device, such as serial
numbers, MAC address, calibration values and so on. A typical practice in the
electronics industry is to produce devices with different functionalities starting
from the same PCB or even the same complete board. This area could be also
used to store configuration parameters employed by the firmware to adapt board
features.

The OTP area is divided into N OTP data blocks of 32 bytes and one lock OTP
block of N bytes. The OTP data and lock blocks cannot be erased. The lock
block contains N bytes               (0 ≤ i ≤ N-1) to lock the corresponding OTP
data block (blocks 0 to N). Each OTP data block can be programmed until the
value 0x00 is programmed in the corresponding OTP lock byte (clearly an
individual bit already set to 0 cannot be restored to 1). The lock bytes must only
contain 0x00 and 0xFF values, otherwise the OTP bytes might not be considered
correctly.
Table 21.5: The organization of the OTP memory in an
                                  STM32F401RE MCU

Table 21.5 shows the organization of the OTP memory in an STM32F401RE
MCU, and it is extracted from the related reference manual. As you can see, this
MCU provides 16 OTP data blocks, with a total of 512 bytes. Sixteen lock bytes
allow to lock the corresponding OTP data block.

Another common practice in digital electronics is to use dedicated and often
external EEPROM memories to store configuration parameters. EEPROM
memories have several benefits compared to the flash ones:

     Their blocks can be individually erased.
     Each block can be erased up to and even more than 1.000.000 times (flash
     erase cycles may be limited to 10.000 cycles).
     The rated lifetime is usually higher than flash memories.
     They are usually cheap than flash (NOR and NAND) memories.
     There exist EEPROM memories able to operate up to 200°C.

However, the main drawback of EEPROM memories is that they are usually
much slower than flash memories and occupy additional space on PCB.

If your design is all about reducing the BOM cost, then ST provides several
application notes that describe how to emulate an EEPROM memory using the
STM32 integrated flash memory (these application notes are titled “EEPROM
emulation in STM32Fxx microcontrollers”). Recently, ST also released a
dedicated STM32Cube Extension package with a lot of interesting functionalities
including wear leveling algorithm to increase emulated EEPROM cycling
capability.
Finally, several MCUs from the STM32L-series provide an integrated true-
EEPROM. For more information, consult the datasheet of your MCU.
21.5 Flash Read Latency and the ART™ Accelerator

In Chapter 1 we have seen that Cortex-M cores provide an n-stage47 instruction
pipeline designed to boost the program execution. However, that pipeline has to
be filled with machine instructions normally stored inside the flash memory. This
operation is a substantial bottleneck, because flash memories are slower if
compared to the CPU clock speed.

If both the CPU and the flash memory run at the same speed, the CPU can feed its
internal pipeline without any penalty48. For example, an STM32F401RE MCU
running at a clock speed lower than 30MHz can access to the flash memory
without delays. Unfortunately, in more performing MCUs it is required to
interleave two successive accesses to the flash memory with one or more (in
some cases even up to ten) delays, called wait states. Wait states correspond to
hardware “busy waits” performed in one or more CPU cycles, and they are a
way to synchronize the CPU with the slower flash memory. Wait states
dramatically reduce the effective performances of the CPU. This limitation is
usually addressed by using dedicated cache memories.

Configuring the exact number of needed wait states is a critical step that depends
on the specific STM32 MCU you are considering. This operation is usually
performed during the SYSCLK configuration, because the higher the CPU
frequency is the more wait states are needed. Configuring the correct number of
wait states is critical especially when we are increasing the CPU speed: we have
to setup the right number of wait states before we increase the CPU speed,
otherwise a BusFault is generated. However, CubeMX is designed to abstract
these details, and it generates the right configuration code depending on the
specific STM32 MCU and the wanted core speed (take a look at the code inside
the SystemClock_Config() routine).
Figure 21.2: The main blocks forming the ART™
                                       Accelerator

ST has developed a distinctive technology available in its more powerful
STM32 microcontrollers: the ART™ Accelerator. The ART™ Accelerator is a
pool of cache technologies (see Figure 21.2), external to Cortex-M core, which
can zero the effects of wait states. The ART™ Accelerator is designed so that it
preservers the Harvard architecture of Cortex-M microcontrollers, providing
separated cache pools for the I-Bus and the D-Bus.

The ART™ Accelerator is composed by:

     an instruction prefetch buffer;
     a dedicated instruction cache to reduce the effects of branching;
     a data cache for literal pools;
     a scheduling policy of the AHB bus that facilitates the access of the CPU to
     the flash controller through the D-Bus bus.

Let us analyze the exact role of these technologies.

The Instruction Prefetch Buffer
When the CPU accesses to the flash memory, it does not fetch one byte at a time,
but it usually reads from 64 up to 256 bits at a time depending on the specific
STM32 MCU. These bits contain a variable number of instructions and for this
reason they are called instruction lines: assuming that the CPU reads 128 bits
(this is what happens in STM32F4 MCUs), this may contain four 32-bit wide
instructions or eight 16-bit wide instructions (it depends if the CPU is running in
thumb mode or not). So, in case of sequential code, at least four CPU cycles are
needed to execute the previous read instruction line. Prefetch on the I-Bus bus
can be used to read the next sequential instruction line from the flash memory
while the current instruction line is being requested by the CPU. This feature is
useful if at least one wait state is needed to access the flash memory.
Instruction prefetch buffer can be enabled by setting the PREFETCH_ENABLE
macro to 1 inside the stm32XXxx_hal_conf.h file.

The Instruction Cache Memory
The content of the prefetch buffer can be invalided due branching. To limit the
time lost due to jumps, it is possible to retain a given number of instruction lines
in an instruction cache memory. Each time a miss occurs (requested data not
present in the currently used instruction line, in the prefetched instruction line or
in the instruction cache memory), the line read is copied into the instruction
cache memory. If the CPU requests data contained in the instruction cache
memory, it is provided without inserting any delay. Once all the “empty”
instruction cache memory lines have been filled, a Least Recently Used (LRU)
policy is used to determine the line to replace in the instruction memory cache.
This feature is particularly useful in case of code containing loops.

This feature can be enabled by setting the INSTRUCTION_CACHE_ENABLE macro
to 1 inside the stm32XXxx_hal_conf.h file, for those MCU providing the
ART™ Accelerator. Data Cache Memory
Assembly instructions often move data between memory locations and CPU
registers. Sometimes, this data is stored inside the flash memory (they are
constant values): in this case, we talk about literal pools. Literal pools are
fetched from flash memory through the D-Bus bus during the execution stage of
the CPU pipeline. The CPU pipeline is consequently stalled until the requested
literal pool is provided. To limit the time lost due to literal pools, accesses
through the AHB data-bus D-Bus have priority over accesses through the AHB
instruction bus I-Bus (this is indeed a bus-arbitration policy over the D-Bus bus).

Moreover, a dedicated data cache memory exists between the D-Bus bus and the
flash memory. This cache is smaller than the instruction cache, but it helps
increasing the overall performances of the CPU. This feature can be enabled by
setting the DATA_CACHE_ENABLE macro to 1 inside the stm32XXxx_hal_conf.h
file, for those MCU providing the ART™ Accelerator.

21.5.1 The Role of the TCM Memories in STM32F7/H7 MCUs

The memory organization of more recent and powerful STM32F7/H7 MCUs
deserves a separate mention. In fact, this family of microcontrollers faces a more
complex and flexible memory and bus organization, offering two distinct
interfaces to access flash and SRAM memories: the Advanced eXtensible
Interface (AXI), which is an ARM bus specification that interconnects the CPU
core to the other peripherals; the Tightly-Coupled Memory (TCM) interface
which interconnects the CPU core to volatile and non-volatile memories directly
coupled with it. Both the interfaces, AXI and TCM, face a Harvard architecture,
providing separated lines for instructions (I-Bus) and data (D-Bus).

Looking at Figure 21.349, you can see that the Cortex-M7 core has three distinct
paths to access the flash controller (and so the flash memory). Before we
describe these three paths, it is important to note a fundamental thing: the Cortex-
M7 core already provides an integrated L1-cache. This cache has two dedicated
cache pools, each one up to 64KB wide, one dedicated to the I-Bus and one for
the D-Bus: this differs from other STM32 families, where data and instruction
caches are implemented exclusively inside the ART™ Accelerator.

Figure 21.3: How the flash memory is accessed in an STM32F7
                                           MCU

In all STM32F7 MCUs, flash memory is accessible through three main interfaces
for read and/or write accesses:

     A 64-bit ITCM interface: it connects the embedded flash memory to the
     Cortex-M7 via the ITCM bus (Path 1 in Figure 21.3) and it is used for the
     program execution and data read access for literal values. The write
     access to the flash memory is not permitted via this bus. The flash
     memory is accessible by the CPU through ITCM starting from the address
     0x0020 0000. Being the embedded flash memory slower than the CPU
     core, the ART™ Accelerator allows 0-wait execution from the flash
     memory at a CPU frequency up to 216MHz in STM32F7 and up to 480MHz
     in STM32H7. The ART™ Accelerator is available only for a flash memory
     access on the ITCM interface. It implements a unified instruction and branch
     cache up to 256 bits x 64 lines. The ART™ Accelerator is available for
     both the instruction and data access, which increases the execution speed of
     sequential code and loops. The ART™ Accelerator also implements an
     instruction prefetch buffer.
     A 64-bit AHB interface: it connects the embedded flash memory to the
     Cortex-M7 via the AXI/AHB bridge (Path 2 in Figure 21.3). It is used for
     the code execution, read and write accesses. The flash memory is
     accessible by the CPU through AXI/AHB bridge starting from the address
     0x0800 0000 and it is cacheable (that is, it can use the L1-cache) reaching
     the same 0-wait performances of the ART™ Accelerator. The L1-cache in
     Cortex-M7 cores can range from 4KB to 16KB. STM32F7/H7 provide two
     cache pools, one for the instructions (I-Bus) and one for the literal pools
     (D-Bus), each one up to 16KB wide. The L1-caches on all Cortex-M7 cores
     are divided into lines of 32 bytes. Each line is tagged with an address. The
     data cache is 4-way set associative (four lines per set) and the instruction
     cache is 2-way set associative. This is a hardware compromise to keep
     from having to tag each line with an address.
     A 32-bit AHB interface: it is used for DMAs transfers from the flash
     memory (Path 3 in Figure 21.3). The DMAs flash memory access is
     performed starting from the address 0x0800 0000.

A fourth path exists (see Figure 21.3) through the Advanced Bus Peripheral
(AHBP) interface, and it is reserved to the access to flash peripheral registers
inside the 0x4000 0000 peripheral mapped region.
Figure 21.4: The bus matrix in an STM32F7 MCU

What is the advantage of this apparently complex architecture? If both the flash
interfaces, that is the AXI/AHB and the ITCM, provide 0-wait execution (one
thanks to internal L1-cache and one thanks to the ART™ Accelerator), why we
should deal with this complexity during the firmware design?

The answer comes from the bus-matrix architecture of an STM32F7 MCU, which
is shown in Figure 21.450. As you can see, the AXI/AHB bus is connected to the
internal L1-cache thanks to the AXIM interface. This means that accesses to
some peripherals on the bus are cacheable. And this is the case of the FMC and
QuadSPI controllers. Thanks to this architecture, it is possible to use external
NVM memories to store data or program code, taking advantage of the 64K L1-
cache, while having parallel access (without the bus arbitration) to the internal
flash memory through the ITCM interface and the ART™ Accelerator. This is a
great performance boost for devices that make use of a lot of memory to store
images, videos and multimedia content in general, but also of large constant data
table, like FFT IV.

The CMSIS layer for Cortex-M7 based MCUs defines a dedicated set of routines
to manipulate Cortex-M7 L1-cache memory (see Table 21.6).
Table 21.6: CMSIS functions to manipulate Cortex-M7 L1-caches
CMSIS-F7 Function               Description
                                Invalidate and then enable the
void SCB_EnableICache(void)
                                instruction cache
                                Disable the instruction cache and
void SCB_DisableICache(void)
                                invalidate its contents
void SCB_InvalidateICache(void) Invalidate the instruction cache
                                Invalidate and then enable the data
void SCB_EnableDCache(void)
                                cache
                                Disable the data cache and then clean
void SCB_DisableDCache(void)
                                and invalidate its contents
void SCB_InvalidateDCache(void) Invalidate the data cache
void SCB_CleanDCache(void)      Clean the data cache
void
                                           Clean and invalidate the data cache
SCB_CleanInvalidateDCache(void)

Figure 21.5: The four SRAM memories available in STM32F7
                                      microcontrollers

Looking at Figure 21.551, there is another important thing to note. As you can see,
STM32F7/H7 microcontrollers offer four distinct SRAM memories, accessible
through three separated paths:

     The instruction RAM (ITCM-RAM), mapped at the address 0x0000
     0000 and accessible only by the core, that is, through Path 1 in Figure 21.5.
It is accessible by bytes, half-words (16 bits), words (32 bits) or double
words (64 bits). The ITCM-RAM can be accessed at a maximum CPU
clock speed without latency. The ITCM-RAM is protected from a bus
contention since only the CPU can access to this RAM region. The ITCM-
RAM plays the same role of the CCM memory in other STM32 MCUs.
The data RAM (DTCM-RAM), mapped on the TCM interface at the
address 0x2000 0000 and accessible by all AHB masters from the AHB
bus Matrix: by the CPU through the DTCM bus (Path 5 in Figure 21.5) and
by DMAs through the specific AHBS “bridge” in the Cortex-M7 core (Path
6 in Figure 21.5). It is accessible by bytes, half-words (16 bits), words (32
bits) or double words (64 bits). The DTCM-RAM is accessible at a
maximum CPU clock speed without latency. The concurrent accesses to the
DTCM-RAM by the masters (core and DMAs) and their priorities can be
handled by the slave control register of the Cortex-M7 core (CM7_AHBSCR
register). A higher priority can be given to the CPU to access the DTCM-
RAM versus the other masters (DMAs). For more details of this register,
please refer to “ARM Cortex-M7 processor Technical Reference Manual”.
The SRAM1, accessible by all the AHB masters from the AHB bus Matrix,
that is, all general purpose DMAs as well as dedicated DMAs. The
SRAM1 is accessible by bytes, half-words (16 bits) or words (32 bits).
Refer to Figure 21.5 (Path 7) for possible SRAM1 accesses. It can be used
for the data load/store as well as the code execution (even if it does not
offer any specific performance boost).
The SRAM2, accessible by all the AHB masters from the AHB bus matrix.
All the general purpose DMAs as well as the dedicated DMAs can access
to this memory region. The SRAM2 is accessible by bytes, half-words (16
bits) or words (32 bits). Refer to Figure 21.5 (Path 8) for possible SRAM2
accesses. It can be used for the data load/store as well as the code
execution (even if it does not offer any specific performance boost).
Figure 21.6: FMC and QuadSPI external memory
                                     controllers

In addition to the internal flash and SRAM memories, STM32F7 memory pools
can be extended using the Flexible Memory Controller (FMC) and the Quad-SPI
controller. Figure 21.652 shows the paths that connect the CPU with these
external memories via the AXI bus. As shown in Figure 21.6, the external
memories can benefit of the Cortex-M7 L1-cache, reaching the maximum of the
performances both while loading/storing data or during the code execution. The
Cortex-M7 L1-cache offers a great performance improvement to STM32F7
microcontrollers compared to the STM32F4 with the same external memory
controllers.

Table 21.7 summarizes the memory types, both internal and external to the MCU,
available in STM32F74xxx/STM32F75xxx MCUs. The table shows the size of
these memories, how they are mapped and the bus interface used to access them.
For example, you can see that the address range 0x0020 0000 - 0x002F FFFF
allows to access to the internal flash memory through the ITCM interface, which
is cacheable thanks to the ART accelerator. Table 21.8 summarizes the same
memories for the STM32F76xxx/STM32F77xxx MCUs (the FMC and QSPI
characteristics are the same and so they are not listed in Table 21.8).

For more information about these topics, it is strongly suggested to have a look at
the AN4667 from ST.
Table 21.7: Memory mapping and sizes in
                         STM32F74xxx/STM32F75xxx MCUs

Table 21.8: Memory mapping and sizes in
                         STM32F76xxx/STM32F77xxx MCUs

21.5.1.1 How to Access Flash Memory Through the TCM Interface

A common question to all novices of the STM32F7 platform is how to take
advantage of the TCM interface. This is clearly a linker script job, which has to
remap the addresses of .text, .bss and .data regions using as base addresses
the ones reported in Table 21.7 and 21.8.

However, this operation cannot be easily performed by changing the starting
address of the FLASH region inside the linker script. This because, as said before,
the access in write-mode through the ITCM interface is not permitted. This
means that the ST-LINK Debugger, or any equivalent debugger, would not be
able to load the program code using the address range 0x0020 0000 - 0x002F
FFFF. To address this limitation, we need to separate the VMA address range
from the LMA one, in the same way we have done for the .data region. For
example, the following linker script fragment shows how to perform this
operation.
 1 /* Specify the memory areas */
 2 MEMORY {
 3     ITCM_FLASH (rx): ORIGIN = 0x00200000, LENGTH = 1024K
 4     AXI_FLASH (rx): ORIGIN = 0x08000000, LENGTH = 1024K
 5     RAM (xrw)      : ORIGIN = 0x20000000, LENGTH = 320K
 6 }
 7
 8 /* Define output sections */
 9 SECTIONS
10 {
11   /* The startup code goes first into FLASH */
12   .isr_vector :
13   {
14     . = ALIGN(4);
15     KEEP(*(.isr_vector)) /* Startup code */
16     . = ALIGN(4);
17   } >ITCM_FLASH AT>AXI_FLASH
18
19   /* The program code and other data goes into FLASH */
20   .text :
21   {
22     . = ALIGN(4);
23     *(.text)           /* .text sections (code) */
24     *(.text*)          /* .text* sections (code) */
25
26     KEEP (*(.init))
27     KEEP (*(.fini))
28
29     . = ALIGN(4);
30     _etext = .;        /* define a global symbols at end of code */
31   } >ITCM_FLASH AT>AXI_FLASH
32
33   /* Constant data goes into FLASH */
34   .rodata :
35   {
36     . = ALIGN(4);
37     *(.rodata)         /* .rodata sections (constants, strings, etc.) */
38     *(.rodata*)        /* .rodata* sections (constants, strings, etc.) */
39     . = ALIGN(4);
40   } >ITCM_FLASH AT>AXI_FLASH

As you can see (look at lines 17, 31 and 40), the VMA address range (that is the
address range used by the CPU to fetch program code) is mapped to the ITCM-
FLASH interface, while the LMA address range (that is the address range used to
store the program in flash memory) is mapped to the AXI interface, which allows
to access to flash memory in write-mode.

21.5.1.2 Using CubeMX to Configure Flash Memory Interface
CubeMX simplifies the configuration of the bus used to access flash memory
(TCM/AXI), of the ART™ Accelerator and Cortex-M7 L1-cache. Going into
Pinout view section and then clicking on the Cortex-M7 entry, it is possible to
configure these parameters, as shown in Figure 21.7.

Figure 21.7: The Cortex-M7
                                   configuration view in CubeMX

       Please, take note that at the time of writing this chapter (October 2021) the generated linker script
       is wrong, because it does not specify distinct LMA and VMA addresses, as shown in the previous
       paragraph.
