24. Advanced Debugging Techniques
In Chapter 5 we started analyzing basic tools and techniques to debug the
firmware running on a target microcontroller. We studied some important Eclipse
features, like breakpoints and step-by-step debugging, useful to understand
what’s going wrong with our code. Those techniques, however, could be not
sufficient to debug real-life applications. Things can go wrong in several ways,
and it is quite common the need of dedicated, and often expensive, hardware
tools to better debug our embedded applications.

This chapter aims to introduce the reader to some advanced debugging
capabilities offered by Cortex-M based microcontrollers. The role of Cortex-M
exceptions is finally presented, showing how to decode core registers that can
provide useful information about the exception source. This chapter also
provides a brief introduction to the Serial Wire Viewer feature implemented in
Cortex-M3/4/7 MCUs, a distinctive ARM technology that allows to perform
real-time tracing of the MCU activities using an external debugger tool.

This chapter is not limited to low-level debugging techniques. We will also see
in action some other features offered by the STM32CubeIDE tool-chain, like
Live Expressions and SFRs view, and we will analyze the features offered by
the CubeHAL to improve error management and to optimize the debugging
process.

       In an ideal world, this chapter would come right after the Chapter 5. Information reported here is
       important to perform an efficient debug during the early experiences with the STM32 platform.
       Unfortunately, to master concepts illustrated in this chapter, you need to study several other topics
       before you can deeply understand the techniques and tools shown here. As a rule of thumb, this
       author suggests reading at least chapters 7, 20 and 21 before approaching this one.

24.1 Understanding Cortex-M Fault-Related Exceptions
At beginning of this long journey, we have seen that Cortex-M based
microcontrollers implement a number of system-related exceptions. Some of
them are fault-related, that is those exceptions are triggered when something
wrong happens during the normal execution flow. By implementing proper
handlers for those fault-related exceptions, we can get rid of the fault origin. This
is extremely useful during debugging, because it helps us isolating the issue from
the rest of the application. However, a correct fault-handling can be useful even
in a “production” firmware: once a fault is detected, we may place the device in
a safe state before trying to reset the board.

Cortex-M3/4/7 cores offer to programmers four fault-related exceptions (see
Table 7.1):

     Memory Management Fault
     Bus Fault
     Usage Fault
     Hard Fault

The first three exceptions are triggered when specific faults take place, and they
are available only in Cortex-M3/4/7 cores. The last one, the Hard Fault
exception, is the only one available even in Cortex-M0/0+ cores. It is also called
the generic fault exception, since it cannot be disabled, and it acts as a collector
for specific fault conditions when the other fault-related exceptions are disabled.

When a fault exception is raised, we can try to derive the cause of fault by
analyzing the content of some “system registers”. Moreover, the simple analysis
of the stack trace can bring us to the root of fault condition at least in the majority
of fault causes102.

What circumstances can generate a system fault? Answering to this obvious
question is not trivial. The most frequent source of fault is a bug in the firmware,
especially during the development stage. An access to an invalid memory
location (quite often due to a broken pointer) is the most frequent source of fault
conditions. An invalid or a not well-implemented vector table is another
common source of faults. A stack overflow is another quite frequent fault
condition, especially in low-cost STM32 MCUs when running an RTOS.

Sometimes, the origin of the fault is not related to the software, but it may be
caused by external factors such as:

     Poor PCB design and layout (this is more common than you might think).
     Unstable or poor power supply (quite common in poor designs).
     Electrical noise (this is especially true for devices operating in rush
     environments).
     Electromagnetic interference (EMI) or electrostatic discharge (ESD).
     Extreme operating environment (e.g., temperature, humidity, etc.).
     Damage of some components (e.g., Flash/EEPROMs devices, crystal
     oscillators, electrolytic capacitors).
     Radiations.

To diagnose the above nasty fault-conditions is really hard. Those are conditions
that no hardware developer would ever want to meet, and they are outside the
scopes of this book. Here we will focus only on software-related faults and to
the ways to identify them. However, before starting analyzing the causes that
trigger the four fault-related exceptions, it is fundamental to analyze the way an
exception is generated from the software point of view. This is important to
identify, or at least to try to, the code that leads to a fault exception.

24.1.1 The Cortex-M Exception Entrance Sequence and the ARM
Calling Convention

For high-level programmers103, to invoke a routine seems an obvious thing. We
just write down the name of the function we are going to call, passing to it a
given number of parameters. And that’s it. However, from the processor point-of-
view, what happens under the hood needs to be specified down to the finest
details and it must match both the processor architecture and the programming
language semantics. For this reason, it is common to talk about calling
convention when describing the process of placing a new routine on the stack.

The ARM Architecture Procedure Call Standard (AAPCS) precisely defines the
calling convention for ARM based architectures. In Chapter 1 we have seen that
Cortex-M based microcontrollers provide several core registers, which are
shown again in Figure 24.1 for your convenience. Not all those core registers
are available in all Cortex-M cores: for example, FPU registers S0-S31 are only
available in Cortex-M4F and Cortex-M7 cores, when the FPU unit is enabled
and used.
Figure 24.1: Cortex-M CPU core registers

Some core registers play a special role because they are used to carry out
processor’s activities. R13 is the Stack Pointer (SP), that is the pointer in
SRAM (so something similar to 0x2000 XXXX in an STM32) to the base of the
most recent entry placed on the stack. This entry represents the local memory
area of a given function and, in a full-descendent stack, SP coincides with the
lowest address of the stack. R14 is the Link Register (LR), that is the address in
FLASH104 (so something similar to 0x0800X XXXX in an STM32) of the
instruction following the instruction that called the given function on the stack.
R15 is the Program Counter (PC), that is the register that contains the address in
FLASH memory of the current assembly instruction.

R0-R3 registers play another important role in the ARM calling convention. They
are used to store the first four parameters to pass to the called function (from
now on, we will use the term callee to indicate the called function, and caller to
indicate the function that calls the other one). If the callee uses up to four
parameters, then the first four general purpose registers contain the content of
those parameters. Clearly, here we are assuming that arguments are word aligned
(four bytes aligned). If, instead, our function accepts more than four parameters,
or their total size exceeds sixteen bytes, then we need to allocate sufficient room
on the callee stack to store the other parameters, before passing the control to the
callee. This usage of R0-R3 registers allows to speedup calling process and to
reduce the amount of used SRAM. Finally, R0-R1 registers are also used to store
the function return value. So, a good rule would be to restrict the number of
parameters to a maximum of four wherever possible. If that isn’t possible, then
you should try to place the most frequently accessed parameters in R0-R3 (that
is, define them as the first four function parameters) so that stack accesses in the
callee are minimized.

Since some of the general-purpose registers play specific roles, as a callee we
cannot modify their content freely, but we must adhere to the following
conventions:

     Callee can freely modify registers R0, R1, R2 and R3.
          This implies that caller needs to save their content (if they are used to
          store relevant data for the caller) before passing the control to the
          callee.
     Callee cannot assume anything on the contents of R0, R1, R2 and R3 unless
     they are playing the role of parameters.
     Callee can freely modify LR register but the value upon entering the
     function will be needed when leaving the function (so this value needs to be
     stored in the callee stack frame).
     Callee can modify all the remaining registers as long as their values are
     restored upon leaving the function. This includes SP and registers R4-R11.
     This means that, after calling a function, we have to assume that (only)
     registers R0-R3, R12 and LR have been overwritten.
     A function should not make any assumption on the contents of the Current
     Program Status Register (CPSR).
     If FPU is enabled and used, callee can freely modify S0-S15 registers,
     which must be saved (together with the FPSCR register) by the caller
     before calling the callee. Instead, callee needs to save content of the S16-
     S31 registers before changing their content.
     R12 is a special “scratch register” used by linkers to perform dynamic
     linking. Not that useful in true-embedded microcontrollers like Cortex-M
     ones, but it is a register that must be saved by the caller according to
     AAPCS105.

So, to recap, from the caller point-of-view, before invoking another routine we
need to save the content of the following registers: R0-R3, R12, R14, CPSR
(plus S0-S15 and FPSCR if FPU is enabled). These registers are highlighted in
red in Figure 24.1.

As high-level programmers, we do not need to take care about these rules. It is a
compiler task to ensure that AAPCS rules are respected. In Chapter 7 we saw
that a distinctive feature of Cortex-M cores is the ability to use regular C
functions as exception handlers. This means that exception handlers are
“stacked” on the main stack as a regular C routine. But this implies that, in order
to allow a C function to be used as an exception handler, the exception
mechanism needs to adhere to the requirements of the AAPCS calling convention
and so it needs to save automatically those “red” registers in Figure 24.1 at
exception entrance and restore them at exception exit under the control of the
processors. In this way when returned to the interrupted program, all registers
would have the same values as when the interrupt entry sequence started.

In addition, since an exception corresponds to an interruption of the main
program flow, and since it can fire anytime, we need to save the content of the
PC, otherwise we do not have a way to return to the main flow when the
exception exits. In a regular function call, the value of the PC is stored inside the
LR register by the branching instructions. Instead, when an exception fires the
value of the return address (PC) is not stored in LR (the exception mechanism
puts a special EXC_RETURN code in LR at exception entry, which is used in
exception return - we will analyze it in a while), and the value of the return
address also needs to be saved by the exception sequence.

So, in total eight registers need to be saved during the exception handling
sequence on the Cortex-M based microcontrollers:

Figure 24.2: How core registers
                               are stacked by the CPU on
                                   exception entrance

     R0-R3
     R12
     SP
     LR
     CPSR

In addition, S0-S15 and FPSCR register need to be saved if the FPU is used.

Where does the processor store these registers? Obviously, they are stored on the
stack106, right at the beginning of the exception handler’s stack frame. This
procedure is called stacking and Figure 24.2 clearly shows the process. Please
note that in Figure 24.2 the color of core registers is lighter than the one used in
Figure 24.1. This because it is important to underline that the processors stores
in those locations the content of core registers before entering in the exception
sequence. When the exception fires, the content of core registers are updated
with the data related to the exception context (for example, the PC will point to
the first instruction of the exception handler, or the SP will point to the top of
MSP right after the stacked core registers).

The content of saved core registers can be useful in evaluating what did generate
a fault exception. For example, if a fault exception triggers due to an access to an
invalid memory location (maybe due to a broken pointer), by inspecting those
registers we can try to understand the place where the illegal memory access is
performed. So, the question is: as high-level programmers, do we have a way to
access to those values? For sure! We only need a little bit of assembly
programming.

Let us suppose we want to access to the content of stacked register when the
EXTI15_10_IRQHandler() is invoked (this is the ISR called when the PC13 pin
- connected with the Nucleo’s blue button - is configured in interrupt mode on the
majority of STM32 microcontrollers). We can define the ISR in the following
way:
 1 void EXTI15_10_IRQHandler(void) {
 2      asm volatile(
 3        " tst lr,#4       \n"
 4        " ite eq          \n"
 5        " mrseq r0,msp    \n"
 6        " mrsne r0,psp    \n"
 7        " mov r1,lr       \n"
 8        " ldr r2,=EXTI15_10_IRQHandler_C \n"
 9        " bx r2"
10      );
11 }
12
13 EXTI15_10_IRQHandler (uint32_t *core_registers, uint32_t lr) {
14      /* core_registers points to the R0-R3, R13, SP and CPSR
15         registers, while the lr argument contains the content
16         of the LR register just before the exception entrance */
17      ....
18 }

The above assembly code may seem hard to understand, but instead is not that
black magic art. The tst instruction performs a bitwise comparison between the
content of the LR register (the current register, not the one saved on the stack)
and the literal 4. If they match (that is, the third bit of LR register is set to 1), then
the PSP stack was the one used at the time of exception entrance. Otherwise, the
MSP was the current used stack. The reason why this check is performed will be
clear soon. Take it as is here.

Instruction at line 7 does a simple thing (this is the tricky part): the content of the
current LR register is placed in the R1 register, and the function
EXTI15_10_IRQHandler_C() is called (note the final _C). This other function
accepts two parameters: core_registers and lr. According to the AAPCS
specification, core_registers will coincide with the register R0107 while lr
with the content of R1. When the exception handler is entered, R0 coincides with
the starting address on the current stack (MSP or PSP) where the core registers
have been stored.

Figure 24.3: How current R0-R1 registers point to
                           stacked register and actual LR register
Figure 24.3 clearly explains this. As you can see, core_registers corresponds
to the R0 register, which holds the base address of stacked registers. lr
corresponds to the R1 register, whose content has been filled with the one of the
actual LR register by the assembly instruction at line 7. We can so access to
stacked registers from the EXTI15_10_IRQHandler_C() routine, and perform
analysis of their content, as we will see later.

24.1.1.1 How to Interpret the Content of the LR Register on Exception Entrance

In Cortex-M based processors, the exception return mechanism is triggered using
a special return address called EXC_RETURN. This value is generated at exception
entrance, and it is stored in the Link Register (LR). When this value is written to
the PC with one of the allowed function return instructions, it triggers the
exception return sequence.

The EXC_RETURN address does not correspond to actual FLASH addresses. It can
assume up to six values, which are listed in Table 24.1.
Table 24.1: EXC_RETURN possible values and their interpretation
               Return    Return             FPU
EXC_RETURN                                                 Description
               Mode      Stack              Enabled
0xFFFF         0                                           Returns to handler mode
                         MSP                N
FFF1           (Handler)                                   (using MSP)
0xFFFF                                                     Returns to thread mode
               1 (Thread) MSP               N
FFF9                                                       (using MSP)
0xFFFF                                                     Returns to thread mode
               1 (Thread) PSP               N
FFFD                                                       (using PSP)
0xFFFF         0                                           Returns to handler mode
                         MSP                Y
FFE1           (Handler)                                   (using MSP)
0xFFFF                                                     Returns to thread mode
               1 (Thread) MSP               Y
FFE9                                                       (using MSP)
0xFFFF                                                     Returns to thread mode
               1 (Thread) PSP               Y
FFED                                                       (using PSP)

For example, if the CPU was running “regular code” (that is, the CPU was in
Thread mode) before entering the exception, if the stack used was the MSP and if
the FPU unit was disabled, then the LR register contains the value 0xFFFF FFF9.
If, instead, the CPU was servicing another exception (maybe an interrupt) when
the current exception entered (that is, the CPU was in Handler mode), then the
content of the LR register is 0xFFFF FFF1.

It is thanks to the EXC_RETURN mechanism that regular C functions can be used as
exception handlers without writing any lines of assembly code. This differs from
other microcontroller architectures, where additional work from the compiler (or
from the developer) is needed to handle the stacking/unstacking of exception
handlers.

Figure 24.5: How the EXC_RETURN value is interpreted

Figure 24.5 shows the complete structure of the EXC_RETURN value. As you can
see, the third bit indicates which stack was used at the time the fault condition
triggers. This clearly explains the usage of the tst instruction in the previous
assembly code to detect the used stack.

24.1.2 Fault Exceptions and Faults Analysis

The fault exception mechanism provided by Cortex-M CPU is useful to detect
sources of faults. During the development lifecycle, it is common to have fault
conditions, especially if you are new to the STM32 platform or the embedded
programming.

This paragraph shows a brief overview of the analysis of fault conditions. It does
not aim to replace the official ARM documentation or the excellent work from
Joseph Yiu(http://amzn.to/1P5sZwq). Its main goal is to provide the necessary
tools and concepts to understanding what’s going wrong when one of the four
fault exceptions is raised. Moreover, as we will see later in the chapter,
STM32CubeIDE provides a dedicated tool to easily inspect fault-related
exceptions and registers to find for the possible fault origin.

Cortex-M3/4/7 cores provide several registers that are used for fault analysis.
They may be used by the fault handler code, but in most cases, they are used
during a debug session. Table 24.2 lists the available registers useful to fault
analysis.
Table 24.2: Registers for fault status and address information
CMSIS
       Register name      Description
Symbol
SCB-   Configurable Fault Provides status information about configurable
>CFSR Status Register     exceptions (MemFault, BusFault, UsageFault)
SCB-   Status for         Provides status information for the HardFault
>HFSR HardFault           exception
SCB-   Debug Fault Status Provides status information for the Debug
>DFSR Register            Monitor exception
SCB-   MemManage Fault If available, shows the address that triggered the
>MMFAR Address Register MemManage fault
SCB-   BusFault Address If available, shows the address that triggered the
>BFAR Register            BusFault fault

SCB->CFSR is the Configurable Fault Status Register and it provides
information for those exceptions that can be optionally enabled (MemFault,
BusFault, UsageFault). It is in turn dived in three sub-registers, as shown in
Figure 24.6. We are going to provide a complete description of them in the
related sub-paragraphs.

Figure 24.6: How the SCB->CFSR is
                                further divided in three sub-
                                          registers

24.1.2.1 Memory Management Exception

This exception can be triggered due to a violation of access rules defined by the
MPU configuration. For example, it is triggered when trying to access in write
mode to a region defined as read only. This exception is available only in
Cortex-M3/4/7 cores and it must be enabled. Once enabled, individual bits of the
SCB->MFSR register (which corresponds to the first byte of the SCB->CFSR
register) can assume the values reported in Table 24.3. The SCB->MFSR register
is set to 0x0 upon reset, and its values stay high until a value of 1 is written to the
register. By inspecting individual bit values, we can derive more information
about the fault cause. For example, if the DACCVIOL bit is set, then an access to a
protected memory location caused the exception. In this case the MMARVALID bit
is set, the register SCB->MMFAR contains the destination memory location that
generated the fault. To see this exception at work, try to execute the example
provided in the paragraph about the MPU unit.

Table 24.3: MemManage Fault Status Register (SCB->MFSR)
Bit Name    Description
7 MMARVALID Indicates that the content of SCB->MMFAR register is valid
6 RESERVED RESERVED
            Floating point lazy stacking error (available on Cortex-M4F
5 MLSPERR
            cores only)
4 MSTKERR   Stacking error
3 MUNSTKERR Unstacking error
2 RESERVED RESERVED
1 DACCVIOL Data access violation
0 IACCVIOL Instruction access violation

24.1.2.2 Bus Fault Exception

This exception is mostly raised due to wrong access either to SRAM memory or
program memory. The two more frequent sources of Bus Fault exception are a
wrong pointer to an illegal SRAM memory region and a bad function pointer. In
addition, the bus fault can also occur during stacking and unstacking of the
exception handling sequence:

     If the bus error occurred during stack pushing in the exception entrance
     sequence, it is called a stacking error.
     If the bus error occurred during stack popping in the exception exit
     sequence, it is called an unstacking error.

Usually, a stacking error indicates a stack overflow: the stack runs out of space
and this causes Bus Fault due to an access to an invalid SRAM location. The
exception system triggers the fault exception, but the CPU cannot push saved core
register on the full stack. This causes a stacking error, which in turn triggers a
Hard Fault. By accessing to the SCB->BFSR we can see that both bits 15 and 12
are set. The content of the SCB->BFAR is so valid, and we can see that it contains
something equal to 0x1fff bff8. This is an invalid SRAM location in STM32
MCU, and so we can easily derive that a stack overflow happened.

Table 24.4 shows the meaning of individual bits in the SCB->BFSR register.
Table 24.4: Bus Fault Status Register (SCB->BFSR)
Bit Name         Description
15 BFARVALID     Indicates that the content of SCB->BFAR register is valid
14 RESERVED      RESERVED
                 Floating point lazy stacking error (available on Cortex-
13   LSPERR
                 M4F cores only)
12   STKERR      Stacking error
11   UNSTKERR    Unstacking error
10   IMPRECISERR Imprecise data access error
9    PRECISERR   Precise data access error
8    IBUSERR     Instruction access error

Bus faults can be classified as:

     Precise bus faults: the fault exceptions happened immediately when the
     memory access instruction is executed.
     Imprecise bus faults: the fault exceptions happened sometime after the
     memory access instruction is executed.

The reason for a bus fault to become imprecise is due to the presence of write
buffers in the processor bus interface. When the processor writes data to a
bufferable address, the processor can proceed to execute the next instruction
even if the transfer takes several clock cycles to complete. When an imprecise
data access error takes place, the SCB->BFAR register is invalid. To derive the
source of fault we need to disassemble the C source code and to identify the
assembly instruction that logically precedes the one pointed by the stacked PC.

24.1.2.3 Usage Fault Exception

This exception can be raised by a wide range of factors. The most common ones,
while developing STM32 applications, are:

     Execution of an undefined instruction (including trying to execute floating
     point instructions when the floating point unit is disabled). This often
     happens when we have an invalid function pointer, that points to a valid
     memory location (often it happens when we have some functions in SRAM),
     but the content of the pointed location does not correspond to an ARM
     assembly instruction.
     Invalid EXC_RETURN code during exception-return sequence. For example,
     trying to return to Thread Mode with exceptions still active (apart from the
     current serving exception).
     Unaligned memory access with multiple load or multiple store instructions
     (including load double and store double instructions).
     Execution of SVC instruction when the priority level of the SVC is the same
     or lower than current level. This may happen when something nasty has
     occurred with the FreeRTOS configuration of system exceptions (usually the
     SysTick IRQ does not have the lowest priority).

It is also possible, once the corresponding configuration is set, to generate usage
faults for the following conditions:

     Divide by zero.
     All unaligned memory accesses.

Table 24.5 shows the meaning of individual bits in the SCB->UFSR register.
Table 24.5: Usage Fault Status Register (SCB->UFSR)
Bit Name           Description
31-
    RESERVED       RESERVED
26
25 DIVBYZERO       Indicates divide by zero fault (can be set only if enabled)
24 UNALIGNED       Indicates that an unaligned access fault has taken place
23-
    RESERVED       RESERVED
20
                Attempt to execute a floating point instruction when the
19   NOCP       Cortex-M4F floating point unit is not available or when the
                floating point unit has not been enabled.
                Attempts to do an exception with a bad value in the
18   INVPC
                EXC_RETURN number
                Attempts to switch to an invalid state (e.g., from ARM to
17   INVSTATE
                Thumb)
16   UNDEFINSTR Attempts to execute an undefined instruction
By default, Cortex-M based MCUs return the value 0 when dividing a number by
zero. If, instead, you need to catch a divide by zero error, then you can enable
this fault condition by setting DIV_0_TRP bit in the SCB->CCR register:
SCB->CCR |= SCB_CCR_DIV_0_TRP_Msk;

The same applies to unaligned memory accesses:
SCB->CCR |= SCB_CCR_UNALIGN_TRP_Msk;

24.1.2.4 Hard Fault Exception

This exception is usually raised by an escalation of the previous configurable
exceptions, if not enabled. In addition, the HardFault can be triggered by:

     Bus error received during a vector table fetch. This happens because the
     vector table is invalid (most of the times we forgot to include the assembly
     file provided by STM).
     Execution of breakpoint instruction (asm("BKPT #0");) with a debugger
     attached.

Table 24.6 shows the meaning of individual bits in the SCB->HFSR register.

Table 24.6: Hard Fault Status Register (SCB->HFSR)
Bit Name            Description
31 DEBUGEVT         Indicates that the Hard Fault is triggered by a debug event
                    Indicates that Hard Fault is generated by an escalation of
                    configurable fault exceptions while they are disabled. In this
30 FORCED
                    case we need to inspect the content of SCB->MFSR, SCB-
                    >BFSR and SCB->UFSR register to derive the fault cause.
29-
    RESERVED RESERVED
2
             Indicates that the Hard Fault is caused by failed vector table
1 VECTBL
             fetch
0 RESERVED RESERVED

24.1.2.5 Secure Fault Exception

The SecureFault exception is available only in Cortex-M33 cores. This
exception is triggered by the various security checks that are performed. It is
triggered, for example, when jumping from Non-secure code to an address in
Secure code that is not marked as a valid entry point. Usually, the firmware treats
a SecureFault as a terminal condition that either halts or restarts the system. Any
other handling of the SecureFault must be checked carefully to make sure that it
does not inadvertently introduce a security vulnerability. Secure faults always
target the Secure state, which is the default core state upon a system reset. This
means that the SecureFault exception is enabled by default.

The Secure Fault Status Register (SFSR) provides information about any
security related faults. Since this book does not cover Cortex-M33 cores we will
not deepen this topic here. For more information, refer to the official STM
documentation.

24.1.2.6 Enabling Optional Fault Handlers

Memory Fault, Bus Fault and Usage Fault are disabled by default. Neither the
HAL_NVIC_EnableIRQ() nor the NVIC_EnableIRQ() can turn ON those
exceptions, which are enabled by setting bits 16, 17 and 18 of the SCB->SHCSR
register. To enable the Memory Fault exception, we use the following
instruction:
SCB->SHCSR |= SCB_SHCSR_MEMFAULTENA_Msk; //Set bit 16

To enable the Bus Fault exception, we use the following instruction:
SCB->SHCSR |= SCB_SHCSR_BUSFAULTENA_Msk; //Set bit 17

To enable the Usage Fault exception, we use the following instruction:
SCB->SHCSR |= SCB_SHCSR_USGFAULTENA_Msk; //Set bit 18

Once one of those exception is enabled, we can configure its priority using the
HAL_NVIC_SetPriority(), like any other configurable exception.

24.1.2.7 Fault Analysis in Cortex-M0/0+ Based Processors

Cortex-M0/0+ cores do not provide Memory Fault, Bus Fault and Usage Fault
exception. Moreover, the corresponding status registers are not available. This
means that we do not have the same diagnostic features offered by Cortex-
M3/4/7 cores.
The analysis of the stacked registers is the sole relevant technique we can use to
diagnose fault reasons. This answer by Joseph Yiu on the official ARM forum
provides additional useful details. Other techniques, such as filling the SRAM
with a sentinel value to detect a stack overflow, may help you finding the source
of fault in your code.

24.2 STM32CubeIDE Advanced Debugging Features
In Chapter 5 we have started analyzing the debugging functionalities offered by
STM32CubeIDE tool-chain. We have familiarized with the most basic features
like breakpoints insertion and step-by-step debugging. Now it is the right time to
see the other debugging functionalities integrated in the official STM
development environment.

All the features shown here are available through the Debugging perspective.

24.2.1 Expressions and Live Expressions

The Expressions view is a powerful feature that allows to access to the content
of memory addresses, variables and other data structures during debugging.
Moreover, it is also able to perform function calls, so that you can evaluate the
result of a given routine. The Expressions view must be explicitly enabled going
to Window->Show View->Expressions.

Figure 24.7: The Expressions view in the
                                   debug perspective

The Figure 24.7 shows several expression examples. pxCurrentTCB is the
current Thread Control Block (TCB) of a task ready to be stopped in FreeRTOS.
As you can see from Figure 24.7, by simply writing down the variable name in
the expression view we can access to its content wherever it is defined in the
code. We can also show a C pointer as an array, using the expression
(variable@len), where variable is the pointer name and len is the amount of
data stored in the array.

In Figure 24.7 also shows that it is possible to call a function (the
HAL_GetTick() in our case) and to obtain its result108. An expression can also
contain arithmetic operations. Finally, the Expressions view is also able to
access to the content of individual memory locations, and to cast their content to
a given datatype (by right-clicking on the expression row you can cast a variable
to a different datatype).

Expressions view in recent Eclipse CDT releases accepts enhanced
expressions. An enhanced expression is a way of easily writing an expression
pattern that will automatically expand to a larger subset of children expressions.
Four types of enhanced expressions can be used:

     Pattern-matched local variables
     Pattern-matched registers
     Pattern-matched array elements
     Expression groups

For example, the pattern “=*” allows to show all local variable in the current
stack frame, while the pattern “=$*” shows core registers. For more information
about enhanced expressions refer to the Eclipse CDT documentation.

Live Expressions view is an STM32CubeIDE distinctive view that works very
much like the Expression view, with the exception that all the expressions are
sampled live during debug execution. The sampling speed is determined by the
number of expressions being sampled. An increased number of expressions being
sampled results in a slower sample rate.

24.2.1.1 Memory Monitors

STM32CubeIDE allows to access to the content of the whole 4GB address
space. You can access to the content of a memory location by using Memory
view. To show the view, go to Window->Show View->Memory. The Memory
view lets you monitor and modify the MCU memory. The address space is
presented as a list of so-called memory monitors. Each monitor represents a
section of memory specified by its location called base address.

Figure 24.8: The Memory Monitors view

Once the view is shown, you can add a new memory location to the monitor view
by clicking on the green cross shown in Figure 24.8. The next step consists in
selecting a “renderer”, that is a way to show the content of the memory location.
You can choose between:

     Floating Point
     Traditional
     Hexadecimal
     ASCII
     Signed and unsigned integer

You can also add more renderers for the same memory location. Finally, you can
configure several options of the memory view (cell size, endianness, memory
format, etc.) by right-clicking on a memory cell.

Figure 24.9: A memory location shown
                          using Hexadecimal and Traditional
                                      renderers

24.2.2 Watchpoints
Every Cortex-M based processor provides a given number of breakpoints and
watchpoints (see Table 24.7). While breakpoints are used to break execution at a
given instruction, watchpoints are used to break execution when a data location
is accessed. Any data or peripheral address can be marked as a watched
variable, and an access to this address causes a debug event to be generated,
which halts program execution. Watchpoint can also be used to halt execution
only when a given expression matches.
Table 24.7: Available breakpoints/watchpoints in Cortex-
                                         M cores
                Cortex-M         Breakpoints         Watchpoints
                M0/0+            4                   2
                M3/4/7/33        6                   4

There are several ways to add a watchpoint in the Eclipse CDT tool-chain. For
example, you can right-click on a variable in the Variables view and the select
the entry Add Watchpoint(C/C++). The same can be performed from the
Expressions view and the Memory monitors view while right-clicking on a
memory location.

Figure 24.10: The watchpoint configuration
                                         view

Once clicked on the Add Watchpoint(C/C++) entry the watchpoint configuration
view appears, as shown in Figure 24.10. Here we can setup the amount of
memory to watch starting from the first word (Range field). Moreover, we can
specify if we want to halt execution when that memory location is accessed in
Read or Write mode. The Enable field allows to enable/disable the watchpoint.
Finally, the Condition field allows to specify a condition. Watchpoints are listed
inside the Breakpoints view.
24.2.3 Instruction Stepping Mode

The Instruction Stepping Mode is a debugging mode that allows to perform
step-by-step debugging of ARM assembly instructions “underlying” a given C
instruction.

Figure 24.11: The Instruction
                                Stepping Mode icon on the Eclipse
                                              toolbar

Instruction Stepping Mode is enabled by clicking on the related icon on the
Eclipse main toolbar, as shown in Figure 24.11. Once enabled, the Disassembly
appears, as shown in Figure 24.12. Eclipse will automatically show the ARM
assembly instructions corresponding to the current C instruction.

       Read Carefully

       The Instruction Stepping Mode dramatically slows down the debugging process, because the
       CPU halts at every assembly instruction. If you cannot understand why the debugging is so slow,
       then you probably forgot the Disassembly view active.

Figure 24.12: The disassembly view

24.2.4 SFRs View
The Special Function Registers (SFRs) view, shown in Figure 24.13, allows to
access to Cortex-M core registers, plus all specific register of a given STM32
device. The registers’ content can be eventually modified by double-clicking on
the register value or on the convenient bit field representation. When debugging
the project, the registers and bit fields are populated with the values read from
the target.

The top of the SFRs view contains a search field to filter visible nodes, such as
peripherals, registers, bit fields. Upon text entry in the search field, only the
nodes containing this text are displayed.
The information at the bottom of the SFRs view displays detailed information
about the selected line. For registers and bit fields, this includes [Access
permission] and [Read action] information. The [Access permission] contains
the following details:

     RO (Read-Only)
     WO (Write-Only)
     RW (Read-Write)
     W1 WriteOnce
     RW1 Read-WriteOnce

The toolbar buttons are located at the top-right corner of the SFRs view. The
[RD] button in the toolbar is used to force a read of the selected register. It
causes a read of the register even if the register, or some of the bit fields in the
register, contains a ReadAction attribute set in the SVD file.
When the register is read by pressing the [RD] button, all the other registers
visible in the view are read again also to reflect all register updates. The
program must be stopped to read registers. The base format buttons ([X16],
[X10], [X2]) are used to change the registers display base.
Figure 24.13: The Registers view in the
                                  debug perspective

24.2.5 Fault Analyzer

STM32CubeIDE provides a useful tool to simplify the debugging process: the
Fault Analyzer (see Figure 24.14). Fault Analyzer tool interprets information
extracted from the Cortex-M fault-related exceptions and registers to identify the
conditions that caused a fault. Upon fault occurrence, the code line where the
fault occurred is displayed in the debugger. The view displays the reasons for the
error condition. Faults are categorized into Hard Fault, Bus Fault, Usage Fault
and Memory Fault.

To further assist fault analysis, an exception stack frame visualization option
provides a snapshot of the MCU register values at the time of the crash. If not
shown, the Fault Analyzer view can be enabled in the Debugger perspective by
going to Window->Show View->Fault Analyzer.

The Fault Analyzer view contains in the top right part a toolbar (see red box in
Figure 24.14):

     The first toolbar button (left) opens the Editor on the fault location return
     address by using the information in the PC and LR registers in the stack and
     the symbol information in the debugged ELF file.
     The second toolbar button (middle) opens the Disassembly view on the
     fault location return address by using the information in PC and LR registers
     in the stack and the symbol information in the debugged ELF file.
     The third toolbar button (right) selects if the PC or LR register is used when
     opening the Editor or Disassembly view on error location.

Figure 24.14: The Fault Analyzer view

24.2.5.1 Tracing Fault-Related Registers Without the IDE Support

Often, it happens that we need to trace a fault happened when the target device is
not in a debug session and the debugger probe is not attached to the device. In
this unenviable situation it could help a lot to know the status of fault and stacked
registers.

We can define the fault-related exceptions (Hard Fault, Memory Fault, Bus
Fault and Usage Fault) so that the stacked registers are easily printed through
the preferred output method (UART, USB, ITM, etc.) in the way described next.
Since the fault-related registers differ from Cortex-M0/0+ (ARMv6-M
architecture) and Cortex-M3/4/7 (ARMv7-M and ARMv7E-M for Cortex-M7),
we are going to describe them separately.
Cortex-M0/0+ - ARMv6-M
The dumping procedure uses the same technique described before when we have
discussed about the stacking procedure performed by the Cortex-M core when
an exception raises. By redefining the system call int _write(int file,
char *ptr, int len) we can redirect the output to the physical medium we
want.
 1 typedef struct {
 2   uint32_t r0;
 3   uint32_t r1;
 4   uint32_t r2;
 5   uint32_t r3;
 6   uint32_t r12;
 7   uint32_t lr;
 8   uint32_t pc;
 9   uint32_t psr;
10 } ExceptionStackFrame;
11
12 void dumpExceptionStack (ExceptionStackFrame* frame, uint32_t lr) {
13   printf ("Stack frame:\r\n");
14   printf (" R0 = %08X\r\n", frame->r0);
15   printf (" R1 = %08X\r\n", frame->r1);
16   printf (" R2 = %08X\r\n", frame->r2);
17   printf (" R3 = %08X\r\n", frame->r3);
18   printf (" R12 = %08X\r\n", frame->r12);
19   printf (" LR = %08X\r\n", frame->lr);
20   printf (" PC = %08X\r\n", frame->pc);
21   printf (" PSR = %08X\r\n", frame->psr);
22   printf ("Misc\r\n");
23   printf (" LR/EXC_RETURN= %08X\r\n", lr);
24 }
25
26 void HardFault_Handler (void) {
27   asm volatile(
28       " movs r0,#4      \r\n"
29       " mov r1,lr       \r\n"
30       " tst r0,r1       \r\n"
31       " beq 1f          \r\n"
32       " mrs r0,psp      \r\n"
33       " b   2f          \r\n"
34       "1:               \r\n"
35       " mrs r0,msp      \r\n"
36       "2:"
37       " mov r1,lr       \r\n"
38       " ldr r2,=HardFault_Handler_C \r\n"
39       " bx r2"
40
41       : /* Outputs */
42       : /* Inputs */
43       : /* Clobbers */
44   );
45 }
46
47 void HardFault_Handler_C (ExceptionStackFrame* frame __attribute__((unused)),
48                           uint32_t lr __attribute__((unused))) {
49   printf ("[HardFault]\r\n");
50   dumpExceptionStack (frame, lr);
51
52 #if defined(DEBUG)
53   __DEBUG_BKPT();
54 #endif
55   while (1);
56 }

Cortex-M3/4/7 - ARMv7-M/ARMv7E-M
The dumping procedure uses the same technique described before when we have
discussed about the stacking procedure performed by the Cortex-M core when
an exception raises. By redefining the system call int _write(int file,
char *ptr, int len) we can redirect the output to the physical medium we
want.
 1 typedef struct {
 2   uint32_t r0;
 3   uint32_t r1;
 4   uint32_t r2;
 5   uint32_t r3;
 6   uint32_t r12;
 7   uint32_t lr;
 8   uint32_t pc;
 9   uint32_t psr;
10 #if defined(__ARM_ARCH_7EM__)
11   uint32_t s[16];
12 #endif
13 } ExceptionStackFrame;
14
15 void dumpExceptionStack (ExceptionStackFrame* frame, uint32_t cfsr,
16                          uint32_t mmfar, uint32_t bfar, uint32_t lr) {
17   printf ("Stack frame:\r\n");
18   printf (" R0 = %08X\r\n", frame->r0);
19   printf (" R1 = %08X\r\n", frame->r1);
20   printf (" R2 = %08X\r\n", frame->r2);
21   printf (" R3 = %08X\r\n", frame->r3);
22   printf (" R12 = %08X\r\n", frame->r12);
23   printf (" LR = %08X\r\n", frame->lr);
24   printf (" PC = %08X\r\n", frame->pc);
25   printf (" PSR = %08X\r\n", frame->psr);
26   printf ("FSR/FAR:\r\n");
27   printf (" CFSR = %08X\r\n", cfsr);
28   printf (" HFSR = %08X\r\n", SCB->HFSR);
29   printf (" DFSR = %08X\r\n", SCB->DFSR);
30   printf (" AFSR = %08X\r\n", SCB->AFSR);
31
32   if (cfsr & (1UL << 7)) {
33        printf (" MMFAR = %08X\r\n", mmfar);
34   }
35   if (cfsr & (1UL << 15)) {
36       printf (" BFAR = %08X\r\n", bfar);
37   }
38   printf ("Misc\r\n");
39   printf (" LR/EXC_RETURN= %08X\r\n", lr);
40 }
41
42 void HardFault_Handler (void) {
43   asm volatile(
44       " tst lr,#4       \r\n"
45       " ite eq          \r\n"
46       " mrseq r0,msp    \r\n"
47       " mrsne r0,psp    \r\n"
48       " mov r1,lr       \r\n"
49       " ldr r2,=HardFault_Handler_C \r\n"
50       " bx r2"
51
52       : /* Outputs */
53       : /* Inputs */
54       : /* Clobbers */
55   );
56 }
57
58 void HardFault_Handler_C (ExceptionStackFrame* frame __attribute__((unused)),
59                           uint32_t lr __attribute__((unused))) {
60   uint32_t mmfar = SCB->MMFAR; // MemManage Fault Address
61   uint32_t bfar = SCB->BFAR; // Bus Fault Address
62   uint32_t cfsr = SCB->CFSR; // Configurable Fault Status Registers
63
64   printf ("[HardFault]\r\n");
65   dumpExceptionStack (frame, cfsr, mmfar, bfar, lr);
66
67 #if defined(DEBUG)
68   __DEBUG_BKPT();
69 #endif
70   while (1);
71 }

24.2.6 Build Analyzer

The Build Analyzer feature interprets program information from the binary ELF
file in detail and presents the information in a dedicated view available in
Window->Show view->Build Analyzer. If a .map file, with the same name of
the ELF file, is found in the same folder as the ELF file the information from the
.map file is also used, and even more information can be presented.

The Build Analyzer view is useful to optimize or simplify a program. The view
contains two tabs, the Memory Regions and Memory Details tabs:
Figure 24.15: The Memory Regions
                             tab in the Build Analyzer view

     The Memory Regions tab is populated with data if the ELF file contains a
     corresponding .map file. When the .map file is available, this tab can be
     seen as a summary of the memory regions with information about the region
     name, start address and size. The size information also comprises the total
     size, free and used part of the region, and usage percentage.
     The Memory Details tab (see Figure 24.16) contains detailed program
     information based on the ELF file. The different linker section names are
     presented with address and size information. Each section can be expanded
     and collapsed. When a section is expanded, functions/data in this section is
     listed. Each presented function/data contains address and size information.

Figure 24.16: The Memory Details
                            tab in the Build Analyzer view

The sort order of a Memory Details tab column can be changed by clicking on
the column name. The information in the Memory Details tab can be filtered by
entering a string in the search field. The view provides a convenient feature. The
sum of the sizes of several lines in the Memory Details tab can be calculated by
selecting these lines in the view. The sum of the selection is presented above the
Name column in the view, as shown in Figure 24.16. The data in the Memory
Details tab can be copied to other applications in CSV format by selecting the
rows to copy and typing Ctrl+C (or CMD+C in Mac).

24.2.7 Static Stack Analyzer

The Static Stack Analyzer feature calculates the stack usage based on the built
program. It analyzes every .su file, generated by GCC from the given .c file,
and the ELF file in detail, and presents the resulting information in the view. The
view can be enabled by going to Window->Show view->Static Stack
Analyzer. The view contains two tabs, the List and Call Graph tabs.

Figure 24.17: The List tab in the Static
                                  Stack Analyzer view

     The List tab (see Figure 24.17) contains a list of all functions included in
     the selected program. Use the Hide dead code selection to enable or
     disable the listing of dead code functions (that is functions discarded by the
     linker because not used at run-time). If used, the Filter field restricts the
     display to functions matching the characters it contains.
     The Call Graph tab (see Figure 24.18) contains detailed program
     information in a tree view. Each function included in the program but not
     called by any other function is presented at the top level. It is possible to
     expand the tree to see called functions. Only functions available in the ELF
     file can be visible in the tab. When used, the Search… button triggers the
     display of the functions matching the characters in the search field. The
     search can be made case sensitive or not depending on the selection in
     checkbox Case sensitive. The small icon left of the function name in
     column Function column indicates the following:
           Green dot: the function uses STATIC stack allocation (fixed stack).
           Blue square: the function uses DYNAMIC stack allocation (run-time
           dependent).
          010 icon: used if the stack information is not known. This can be the
          case for library functions or assembler functions.
          Three arrows in a circle: used in the Call Graph tab when the function
          makes recursive calls.

Figure 24.18: The Call Graph tab in the
                               Static Stack Analyzer view

24.3 Serial Wire Viewer Tracing
Cortex-M based microcontrollers integrate several debugging and tracing
technologies in the same die. JTAG and SWD are two complimentary
specifications that allow to connect an external debugger to the target MCU. The
same interfaces are used to implement tracing capabilities. Tracing allows to
export internal activities performed by the CPU in real-time. It is a sort of live-
hardware debugging, and it is carried out using the 5 signals of the JTAG port.
Tracing is carried out due to the presence of a technology named Embedded
Trace Macrocell (ETM), but it requires faster and more advanced debuggers.
ETM tracing is a sort of “sniffing” technology, and it does not impact on the
MCU performances.
       Differences Between JTAG and SWD Interfaces

       Novice users tend to be confused by these two debugging standards, which are both supported by
       STM32 microcontrollers. The Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) is a standard that defines both
       signaling characteristics and data protocol specification. It is based on five signals, plus two
       additional wires used to detect target VDD voltage and GND. JTAG allows to connect external
       debug probes to microcontrollers. It is a widely adopted standard in the electronics industry.

       The Serial Wire Debug (SWD) is an alternative ARM proprietary 2-pin electrical interface that
       uses the same JTAG protocol. SWD enables the debugger to become another AMBA bus master
       for access to system memory and peripherals or debug registers. Data rate is up to 4 Mbytes/sec
       at 50 MHz. SWD also has built-in error detection. On JTAG devices with SWD capability, the
       TMS and TCK are used as SWDIO and SWCLK signals, providing for dual-mode programmers. An
       additional and optional signal, named Serial Wire Output (SWO), is used to exchange data and
       messages with the host application with a little impact on the MCU performances. We will analyze
       this functionality in a while.

The Instrumentation Trace Macrocell (ITM) is a less demanding tracing
technology that allows sending software-generated debug messages through the
SWD, using a specific signal I/O named Serial Wire Output (SWO). The
protocol used by the SWO pin to exchange data with the debugger probe is
called Serial Wire Viewer (SWV). The SWV support is not available in Cortex-
M0/0+ based microcontrollers.

Compared to other “debugging-alike” peripherals like UART or to other
technologies like the ARM semihosting, SWV is much faster. Its communication
speed is proportional to the MCU speed, and this allows to limit the impact of
the exchanged data on firmware performances. Clearly, the more fast runs the
SWO I/O, the faster needs to be the debugger.

SWV provides the following types of target information:

    Event notification on data reading and writing.
    Event notification on exception entry and exit.
    Event counters.
    Timestamp and CPU cycle information, which can be used for program
    statistical profiling.
The CMSIS-Core package for Cortex-M3/4/7 cores provide necessary glue to
handle SWV protocol. For example, the ITM_SendChar() routines allows to
send a character using the SWO pin. This allows us to redefine the _write()
system call so that the output of the printf() routine can be redirected to the
SWV console. SWV protocol defines 32 different stimulus ports: a port is a
“tag” on the SWV message used to enable/disable messages selectively. Writing
different types of data to different SWV channels allows the debugger to interpret
or visualize the data on various channels differently. The default stimulus port is
0.

The STM32CubeIDE provides an extensive set of tools and views to exploit all
debugging possibility offered by the SWV technology. The usage of this
debugging weaponry is clearly optional, but for large and complex projects its
usage is a must.

24.3.1 Enabling SWV Debugging

To debug and use the Serial Wire Viewer (SWV) in STM32CubeIDE, both the
debugger probe and the GDB server must support SWV. In the typical
development environment used in this text, this is always true since both
integrated ST-LINK interface (both V2.1 or V3) and ST-LINK GDB Server
support SWV. Clearly, when using SWV, the target MCU shall be configured so
that the SWD is properly enabled, as shown in Figure 24.19109.

Figure 24.19: MCU PINs
                             configuration to support SWD

To use the SWV, it is required to configure the Debug Configuration
accordingly, as shown in Figure 24.20. To properly decode the bytes sent over
the SWO port, the host debugger needs to know the frequencies of CPU core.
This value is specified through the Core Clock (MHz) field. By default,
STM32CubeIDE sets this value to the default clock configuration for the selected
STM32 MCU. For example, by default CubeMX sets the default clock speed for
an STM32F401RE MCU at 84MHz. If in doubt about the effective running
frequency, you can inspect the content of the SystemCoreClock global variable
by using the Expressions view during a debug session, as shown in Figure
24.21.

       Please, take note that if your firmware changes the core clock firmware dynamically at run-time,
       then it is important to know the current core clock frequency when you need to use the SWD
       interface. This is a quite frequent source of confusion the first times the SWV is used.

Another important configuration is the SWO clock frequency. By default, the
STM32CubeIDE sets it at the maximum switching frequency given the configured
core clock. This allows to reduce the overhead introduced by the SWV interface:
bytes sent over the SWD port need to be exchanged at a given frequency, and this
could impact on the overall firmware performances. However, the ST-LINK
V2.1 provides a maximum SWD frequency up to 4MHz, while the more recent
ST-LINK V3 runs up to 24MHz. If you are using a debug adapter running a lower
SWD frequency, then you can limit the SWO clock by specifying the maximum
value for your probe.

Figure 24.20: How to enable SWD in
                                       STM32CubeIDE
Figure 24.21: How to derive the
                           running core clock frequency by
                              using Debug Expressions

24.3.2 Configuring SWV

Once the SWV is enabled in the Debug configuration, we have to configure
some relevant global settings that define what kind of information we are going
to trace. It is possible to access to SWV settings from any of the SWV views
available in Window->Show View->SWV, as shown in Figure 24.22. For
example, the Figure 24.23 shows the SWV Trace Log view: as you can see, in
the top-left part of the view there is the main SWV toolbar; by clicking on the
Settings icon, you can access to SWV settings, as shown in Figure 24.24. Let us
describe the most relevant setting fields.

Figure 24.22: How to enable one of the SWV views

Figure 24.23: How to access to SWV settings

    Clock Settings: these fields are disabled and only present the values used
    and configured in the Debug Configurations for the debug session. If these
values need to be changed, close the debug session and open the Debug
Configurations to modify them.
Trace Events: the following events can be traced.
     CPI (Cycles per instruction): for each cycle beyond the first one that
     an instruction uses, an internal counter is increased with one. The
     counter (DWT CPI count) can count up to 256 and is then set to 0. Each
     time that happens, one of these packets are sent. This is one aspect of
     the processors performance and used to calculate instructions per
     seconds. The lower the value, the better the performance.
     SLEEP (Sleep cycles): the number of cycles the CPU is in sleep
     mode. Counted in DWT Sleep count register. Each time the CPU has
     been in sleep mode for 256 cycles, one of these packets is sent. This is
     used when debugging for power consumption or waiting for external
     devices.
     FOLD (Folded instructions): a counter for how many instructions are
     folded (removed). Every 256 folded instructions (taken zero cycles)
     will receive one of these events. Counted in DWT Fold count register.
     Branch folding is a technique where, on the prediction of most
     branches, the branch instruction is completely removed from the
     instruction stream presented to the execution pipeline. Branch folding
     can significantly improve the performance of branches, taking the CPI
     for branches below 1.
     EXC (Exception overhead): the DWT Exception count register keeps
     track of the number of CPU cycles spent in exception overhead. This
     includes stack operations and returns but not the time spent processing
     the exception code. When the timer overflows, one of these events is
     sent. Used to calculate the actual exception handling cost to the
     program.
     LSU (Load Store Unit Cycles): the DWT LSU count register counts
     the total number of cycles the processor is processing an LSU
     operation beyond the first cycle. When the timer overflows, one of
     these events is sent. With this measurement, it is possible to track the
     amount of time spent in memory operations.
     EXETRC (Trace Exceptions): whenever an exception occurs,
     exception entry, exception exit and exception return events are sent.
     These events can be monitored in the SWV Exception Trace Log
     view. From this view, it is possible to jump to the exception handler
     code for that exception.
Figure 24.24: The SWV settings dialog

     PC Sampling: enabling this starts sampling the Program Counter at some
     cycle interval. Since the SWO pin has a limited bandwidth, it is not advised
     to sample to fast. Experiment with the Resolution (cycles/ sample setting)
     to be able to sample often enough. The results from the sampling are used,
     among other things, for the SWV Statistical Profiling view.
     Timestamps: must be enabled to know when an event occurred. The
     Prescaler should only be changed as a last effort to reduce overflow
     packets. The Timestamp setting is used with the SWV Data Trace
     Timeline Graph, as we will see later.
     Data Trace: it is possible to trace up to four different C variable symbols,
     or fixed numeric areas of the memory. To do that, enable one comparator
     and enter the name of the variable or the memory-address to trace. The
     value of the traced variables can be displayed both in the Data Trace and
     Data Trace Timeline Graph views. More about this later.
     ITM Stimulus Ports: there are 32 ITM ports available (tags for messages),
     which can be used by the application. For instance, the CMSIS function
     ITM_SendChar() can be used to send characters to a given port. The
     packets from the ITM ports are displayed in the SWV ITM Data Console
     view. More about this later.

24.3.3 SWV Views

STM32CubeIDE provides six dedicated views to exploit the SWV features. We
are now going to explain each one of them. The enable SWV tracing in any view,
the Start/Stop Trace button (red one) on the view toolbar need to be toggled, as
shown in Figure 24.23. Please, take note that any change to the SWV
settings dialog will affect the SWV tracing once the SWV is stopped and
then re-started.

24.3.3.1 SWV Trace Log

The SWV Trace Log view (shown in Figure 24.23) lists all incoming SWV
packets in a spreadsheet. The data in this view can be copied to other
applications in CSV format by selecting the rows to copy and type Ctrl+C (or
CMD+C in Mac). The column information in the SWV Trace Log view is
described in Table 24.8.

Table 24.8: Columns’ description of SWV Trace Log view

24.3.3.2 SWV Exception Trace Log

The SWV Exception Trace Log view (shown in Figure 24.25) is composed of
two tabs.

Data Tab
The first tab is similar to the SWV Trace Log view but is restricted to exception
events. It also provides additional information about the type of event. The data
can be copied and pasted into other applications. Each row is linked to the code
for the corresponding exception handler. Double-click on the event to open the
corresponding interrupt hander source code in the Editor view. The column
information in the SWV Exception Trace Log – Data tab is described in Table
24.9.
Figure 24.25: The SWV Exception Trace Log view

Table 24.9: Columns’ description of SWV Exception Trace Log Data
                                            Tab

Statistics Tab
The second tab displays statistical information about exception events. This
information may be of great value when optimizing the code. Hypertext links to
exception handler source code in the editor is included. The column information
in the SWV Exception Trace Log – Statistics tab is described in Table 24.10.

Table 24.10: Columns’ description of SWV Exception Trace Log
                                       Statistics Tab

24.3.3.3 SWV Data Trace
The SWV Data Trace view (see Figure 24.26) tracks up to four different
symbols or areas in the memory. For example, global variables can be
referenced by their name. The data can be traced on Read, Write and Read/Write.
Four comparators are available in the SWV settings dialog. For example, in
Figure 24.24 two global variables SystemCoreClock and uwTick (the global
HAL tick counter) in the program are traced on Read and Write access. The
generated output can contain both just the data value and the PC value tracking
the instruction accessed in reading/writing the memory location. The SWV Data
Trace is able to trace just integer values.

Figure 24.26: The SWV Data Trace
                                          view

24.3.3.4 SWV Data Trace Timeline Graph

The SWV Data Trace Timeline Graph view contains a graphical display that
shows the distribution of variable values over time. It applies to the variables or
memory areas in the SWV Data Trace. The Figure 24.27 shows the plot of
sin()/cos() functions. Like the SWV Data Trace, the timeline graph can plot
just integer values.

The SWV Data Trace Timeline Graph has the following features:

     The graph can be saved as a JPEG image file by clicking on the camera
     toolbar button.
     The graph shows the time in seconds by default but can be changed to cycles
     by clicking on the clock toolbar button.
     Y-axis can be adjusted to best fit by clicking on the y-axis toolbar button.
     Zoom in and out by clicking on the [+] and [–] toolbar buttons.
     The zoom range is limited while debug is running. Zoom details are
     available when debug is paused.
Figure 24.27: The SWV Data Trace Timeline
                                          Graph view

24.3.3.5 SWV ITM Data Console

The SWV ITM Data Console (see Figure 24.28) is the most useful feature in
the SWV toolset, especially if your target device cannot have a dedicated UART
port to print messages. The SWV ITM Data Console prints readable text output
from the target application. Typically, this is done via printf() with output
redirected to ITM channel 0. Other ITM channels can get their own console
views.

To use the SWV ITM Data Console view, first enable one or more of the 32
ITM ports in the Serial Wire Viewer settings dialog (see Figure 24.24). The
packets from the ITM ports are displayed in the SWV ITM Data Console view.
The CMSIS function ITM_SendChar() can be used by the application to send
characters to the port 0, and the printf() function can be redirected to use the
ITM_SendChar() function by properly overriding the _write() system call in
the Core/Src/syscalls.c, as shown below:
#include "stm32fXXxx.h"
...
int _write(int file, char *ptr, int len) {
        for (int DataIdx = 0; DataIdx < len; DataIdx++)
                ITM_SendChar(*ptr++);
        return len;
}

The CMSIS API does not provide a convenient function to send character to
other stimulus ports. However, this can be easily performed by defining the
following function:
#include "stm32fXXxx.h"
...
__STATIC_INLINE uint32_t ITM_SendCharToPort (uint32_t ch, uint8_t port)
{
  if (((ITM->TCR & ITM_TCR_ITMENA_Msk) != 0UL) &&      /* ITM enabled */
      ((ITM->TER & (1UL << port)     ) != 0UL))       /* ITM Port #n enabled */
  {
    while (ITM->PORT[port].u32 == 0UL) {
      __NOP();
    }
    ITM->PORT[port].u8 = (uint8_t)ch;
  }
  return (ch);
}

It is possible to open new port tabs in the SWV ITM Data Console (for the
other stimulus ports) by pressing the green [+] button on the toolbar.

Figure 24.28: The SWV ITM Data
                                         Console view

24.3.3.6 SWV Statistical Profiling

The SWV Statistical Profiling (see Figure 24.29) view displays statistics based
on Program Counter (PC) sampling. It shows the amount of execution time spent
within various functions. This is useful when optimizing code. The data can be
copied and pasted into other applications. The view is updated when debugging
is suspended. To enable profiling, follow these steps:

   1. Configure SWV to send Program Counter samples, as shown in Figure
      24.24, by enabling PC Sampling flags and Timestamps. With the given
      Resolution Cycles/sample, SWV reports the Program Counter values to
      STM32CubeIDE. Set the Resolution Cycles/sample to a high value to
      avoid interface overflow.
   2. Open the SWV Statistical Profiling view by selecting Window->Show
      View->SWV Statistical Profiling. The view is empty since no data is
      collected yet.
  3. Press the red Start/Stop Trace button on the SWV view toolbar to send the
     configuration to the board.
  4. Resume program debugging. STM32CubeIDE starts collecting statistics
     about function usage via SWV when the code is executing in the target
     system.
  5. Suspend (Pause) the debugging. The view displays the collected data. The
     longer the debugging session, the more statistics are collected.

Figure 24.29: The SWV Statistical
                                      Profiling view

Table 24.11: Columns’ description of SWV Statistical Profiling
                                          view

24.4 Debugging Aids from the CubeHAL
The CubeHAL implements run-time failure detection by checking the input values
of all HAL API. The run-time checking is achieved by using an assert_param()
macro. This macro is used in all CubeHAL functions having an input parameter.
It allows verifying that the input value lies within the parameter allowed values.

To enable run-time checking you need to define the USE_FULL_ASSERT macro at
project level (both in the project settings or by uncommenting the macro
definition in the stm32XXxx_hal_conf.h file). CubeMX generates a function
named assert_failed() in the main.c file. The function is defined in the
following way:
void assert_failed(uint8_t* file, uint32_t line);

The function is automatically invoked by the assert_param() macro if an
assertion is not satisfied. The macro will automatically pass to the function the
filename and the exact lines of code where the assert condition is not satisfied.

The implementation of the assert_failed() function is left to the user. A
simple implementation consists in placing a software breakpoint by invoking the
bkpt ARM instruction:

void assert_failed(uint8_t* file, uint32_t line) {
        asm("BKPT #0");
}

Enabling the USE_FULL_ASSERT macro during the development stage can provide
an important help to understand what’s going wrong with the CubeHAL,
especially if you are new to the CubeHAL.

24.5 External Debuggers
Serious projects demand serious tools. And this is dramatically true in
electronics design. If you reached this part of the book without skipping any
fundamental chapter, then you already know the limits of the ST-LINK debugging
interface.
Figure 24.30: A
                                 SEGGER J-Link
                                  Ultra+ debug
                                      probe

SEGGER is a German company specialized in designing external debug probes
for the ARM Cortex portfolio (including Cortex-M/R/A microprocessors and
other modern MCUs like PIC32 and Renesas RX series). SEGGER J-Links (see
Figure 24.30) are the most widely used line of debug probes available today,
and they are often sold as OEM version for other vendors (IAR and Keil debug
probes are nothing more than a J-Link).

The most relevant features offered by J-Link debuggers are:

     Up to 3 MByte/s download speed.
     Compatible with all popular tool-chains including the STM32CubeIDE.
     Supports an unlimited number of software breakpoints in flash memory.
     Allows setting breakpoints in external flash memory of Cortex-M systems
     through FMC controller.
     Cross platform support (Microsoft Windows, Linux, Mac OS X).
     Supports concurrent access to CPU by multiple applications.
     Support for multi core debugging.
     Remote Server included. Allows using J-Link remotely via TCP/IP.
     Software comes with free GDB server, allowing usage of J-Link with all
     GDB-based debug solutions.
     Production flash programming software (J-Flash) available.
     Debugger independent flash download (internal flash, CFI flash, SPIFI
     flash).
     Supports CPU/MCU internal trace buffer (ETB, MTB, etc.).
     Supports ETM tracing (J-Trace Cortex-M, J-Trace ARM).
     Wide target voltage range: 1.2V - 3.3V, 5V tolerant.
     Supports multiple target interfaces (JTAG, SWD, FINE, SPD, etc.).

J-Link probes ranges from the EDU edition, which costs about 60$, up to the J-
Trace PRO edition that costs about $1100. If you are a student or a low-budget
hobbyist, the EDU edition worth spending since it supports all relevant features
provided by professional J-Link probes. If you are a professional, then the Ultra+
is a good deal according to this author.

However, for owners of STM development boards (Nucleo, Discovery, Eval)
there is a good and totally free alternative: in April 2016 SEGGER has released
a firmware upgrade for the ST-LINK V2/V2.1110 interface that transforms it in a
J-Link compatible debug probe. By downloading a dedicated software tool111,
your ST-LINK is transformed in a J-Link OB compatible interface, and you can
use the most important software tools by SEGGER112. Moreover, you can easily
revert the interface to an ST-LINK if you want. In case you experience issue in
switching the ST-LINK V2 debugger to J-Link OB, please follow the
instructions in this blog post.

When debugging with SEGGER debug probe, there is no need to use ST-LINK
GDB Server, because SEGGER provides its own compatible GDB server,
named JLinkGDBServer. This is one of the fundamental reasons to choose these
tools, because the JLinkGDBServer is a faster and more reliable alternative to
ST-LINK being cross-platform at the same time. The instructions to upgrade the
ST-LINK interface to a J-Link compatible one are clearly reported on the
SEGGER website. We will not repeat them here. Instead, we are now going to
analyze how to use a J-Link debug probe with the GNU MCU Eclipse tool-chain.

You are not forced to install SEGGER software tools to start using SEGGER
debug probes, since the JLinkGDBServer is already integrated in the
STM32CubeIDE. To use the J-LINK with the STM32CubeIDE you need to select
the corresponding debug probe in the Debug Configurations.

24.6 Debugging two Nucleo Boards Simultaneously
We may need to debug two STM32 based devices simultaneously. This is not
uncommon, especially when dealing with communication protocols.
STM32CubeIDE allows us to debug two or more boards on the same computer.

To launch two instances of the STLINK GDB Server we need to create two
separated Debug Configurations, one for each board. In every configuration we
need to configure two fundamental parameters: the S/N of the ST-LINK interface
and the GDB Server port number (see Figure 24.31). Regarding the GSB Server
port this is up to us to choose two or more separated port number (61234 and
61235 is fine). Instead, to derive the ST-LINK S/N it is sufficient to click on
Scan button close to the ST-LINK S/N field. STM32CubeIDE will list you the
serial number of every board attached to the PC.

Let us suppose that two different boards/microcontrollers are used: HW_A and
HW_B. When the debug configuration has been configured for both projects so
that each board is associated to a specific probe, it is time to test and debug each
board individually first. When it is confirmed that this is working, the debug of
both targets at the same time can be started as follow:

  1. Start to debug HW_A.
  2. The perspective switches automatically to the Debug perspective in
     STM32CubeIDE when a debug session for HW_A is started.
  3. Switch to the C/C++ perspective.
  4. Select the project for HW_B and start debugging it. The Debug perspective
     opens again.
  5. There are two application stacks/nodes in the Debug view, one for each
     project. When changing the selected node in the Debug view, the related
     editor, the Variable view and others views are updated to present
     information associated to the selected project.
Figure 24.31: How to condigure Debug
                      Configurations fields when using two ST-LINK
                                      simultaneously

24.7 ARM Semihosting
ARM semihosting is a distinctive feature of the Cortex-M platform, and it is
extremely useful for testing and debug purpose. It is a mechanism that allows
target boards to “exchange messages” from the embedded firmware to a host
computer running a debugger. In Cortex-M0/0+ core, where the ITM interface is
not available, this mechanism enables printf() and scanf() functions if there
is no way to use one of the integrated UARTs. However, the usage of the ARM
semihosting is not limited to the message printout. Semihosting allows to access
to other host PC I/O capabilities, such as terminals and files. This last feature is
extremely useful when you have to transfer large amount of data between the
target board and the host PC.

Semihosting requires additional runtime library code, and it can be implemented
in several ways on Cortex-M architecture. However, the preferred one is using
the bktp ARM assembly instruction, as we will see later. The next paragraph
will give a quick explanation of how to configure our STM32CubeIDE project to
use semihosting in our code. This will allow us to print messages on the
OpenOCD console.

24.7.1 Enable Semihosting on a Project

To use semihosting with STM32CubeIDE some updates are needed to be done in
the project. A debugger supporting semihosting is also required. This article
guides on how to enable semihosting when using OpenOCD, ST-LINK and
STM32 devices. Please note that ST-LINK GDB server does not support
semihosting, and for this reason we will configure the Debug configuration to
run OpenOCD.

To enable semihosting follow these steps:

1. Exclude from compilation (or delete it completely) the file
Core/Src/syscalls.c. You can easily perform this task by right-clicking on the file
in the Project Explorer pane and then selecting Resource Configuration-
>Exclude from Build….
2. Add the following two lines in beginning of Core/Src/main.c to include
<stdio.h> and to use initialise_monitor_handles() prototype and add a
call to initialise_monitor_handles() function in the beginning of main()
function.
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 extern void initialise_monitor_handles(void);
3 ...
4 int main(void) {
5   /* USER CODE BEGIN 1 */
6   initialise_monitor_handles();

3. Update GCC Linker project configuration adding rdimon library to the linked
libraries, as shown in Figure 24.32.

Figure 24.32: Configure the project to link
                                       rdimon library

4. Update GCC Linker project configuration adding “-specs=rdimon.specs”
flag In Miscellaneous as shown in Figure 24.33.
Figure 24.33: Configure the project to link
                               add rdimon.specs flag

5. Configure the current Debug configuration by selecting ST-LINK
(OpenOCD) in the Debug probe field and add “monitor arm semihosting
enable” initialization command in Debug Configurations - Startup tab, as
shown in Figure 24.34. The Debug Console view is used for semihosting
input/output and when debugging, as shown in Figure 24.35.

Figure 24.34: Configure the Debug
                      Configuration to enable semihosting with
                                     OpenOCD
Figure 24.35: The output messages by
                             using semihosting in the Debug Console
                                              view

       Read Carefully

       Semihosting implementation in OpenOCD is designed so that every string must be terminated with
       the newline character (\n) before the string appears on the OpenOCD console. This is a quite
       common error, and it leads to a lot of frustration the first times programmers start using it. Never
       forget to terminate every string passed to printf() routine with the (\n).

24.7.2 Semihosting Drawbacks

Semihosting is an excellent feature, but it has also several drawbacks. First of
all, it works only during a debug session, and it completely hangs the firmware if
not running under the GDB control. For example, upload am example using
semihosting on your Nucleo board and terminate the debug session. If you reset
your board pressing the RESET button, you will see that the firmware hangs.
This happens because the firmware is stuck in the printf() routine (more about
why this happens in the next paragraph). This is a quite frequent issue that every
novice encounters every time it starts working with the STM32 platform.

Another important aspect to keep in mind is that semihosting has a great impact
on the firmware performance. Every semihosting call costs several CPU cycles,
and it impacts on the overall performance. Moreover, this cost in unpredictable,
because it involves activities that happens outside the MCU execution streams
(more about this in the next paragraph).

24.7.3 Understanding How Semihosting Works

There are several ways to implement semihosting capabilities. One of this is
using software breakpoints. ARM Cortex-M offers two types of breakpoints:
Hardware (HBP) and Software (SBP) breakpoints.

HBP is set by programming the Break Point Unit (a hardware unit inside every
Cortex-M core) to monitor the core buses for an instruction fetch from a specific
memory location. HBP can be set on any location in RAM or ROM using an
external physical programmer connected to the Debug Interface. In case of the
Nucleo board, the integrated ST-LINK programmer is connected to the MCU
Debug Interface, and it is in turn managed by OpenOCD. Figure 24.36 shows
the relation between the external debugger and the internal MCU debug unit.

Figure 24.36: Debug components in Cortex-M microcontrollers

SBP are implemented by adding a special bkpt instruction immediately before
the code we want to inspect. When the core executes the breakpoint instruction, it
will be forced into debug state. The debugger sees that the MCU is halted and
start debugging the MCU. The bkpt instruction accepts an immediate 8-bit
opcode, which can be used to specify particular break conditions. If you want to
halt the execution of your firmware and transfer the control to the debugger, then
the instruction:
asm("bkpt #0")
is what you need. This technique is used to implement software conditional
breakpoint. For example, suppose you have a strange fault condition that you
need to inspect. You could have a piece of code like the following one:
if(cond == 0) {
   ...
} else if(cond > 0) {
   ...
} else { /* Abnormal state, let us debug it */
        asm("bkpt #0");
}

In the above code, if cond variable assumes a negative value, the MCU is halted
and the control is transferred to GDB, which allows us to inspect the call stack
and the current stack frame.

Semihosting is implemented using the special immediate opcode 0xAB. That is,
the instruction:
asm("bkpt #0xAB")

causes the MCU to stop, but this time OpenOCD sees the special opcode and
interprets it as semihosting operation. By convention, the r0 register contains the
type of operation (_write(), _read(), etc) and the r1 register contains the
pointer to the region of memory containing the function parameters. For example,
if we want to write a null terminated string on the host PC console, then we can
write the following assembly instructions:
char msg[] = "Hello World!\r\n";
asm (
   "mov r0, 0x4 \n"      /* OPCODE for WRITE0 */
   "mov r1, %[addr] \n" /* Address of string to transfer to OpenOCD */
   "bkpt #0xAB"
   :
   : [addr] "r" (msg)    /* Pass the reference to the msg string */
);

Here we use the capabilities of GCC asm() function to pass the pointer of the
msg buffer containing the string “Hello World!\r\n”.

Table 24.12 summarizes the supported semihosting operations. Please, take note
that OpenOCD currently does not support all of them.

Now you can understand why semihosting causes the MCU to become stuck if the
debugger is not active. The bkpt instruction halts the MCU execution, and there
is no way to restore it without using an external debugger (or doing a hardware
reset). Moreover, every time the bkpt instruction is issued, the internal MCU
activities are suspended until the control passes to the debugger. During this time,
important asynchronous events (like interrupts generated by peripherals) could
be lost. This interval time is totally unpredictable, and it depends on many
factors (speed of the hardware interface, current Host PC load, speed of ST-
LINK firmware, etc., etc.).
Table 24.12: Summary of semihosting operations
Semihosting     immediate
                          Description
operation       opcode
                          Sets the processor to Supervisor mode and
EnterSVC        0x17      disables all interrupts by setting both
                          interrupt mask bits in the new CPSR.
                          This SVC can be called by an application
                          to report an exception to the debugger
ReportException 0x18      directly. The most common use is to report
                          that execution has completed, using
                          ADP_Stopped_ApplicationExit.
                          Closes a file on the host system. The
SYS_CLOSE       0x02      handle must reference a file that was
                          opened with SYS_OPEN.
                          Returns the number of centiseconds since
SYS_CLOCK       0x10
                          the execution started.
                          Returns the number of elapsed target ticks
                          since execution started. Use
SYS_ELAPSED     0x30
                          SYS_TICKFREQ to determine the tick
                          frequency.
                          Returns the value of the C library errno
SYS_ERRNO       0x13      variable associated with the host
                          implementation of the semihosting SVCs.
SYS_FLEN        0x0C      Returns the length of a specified file.
                          Returns the command line used to call the
SYS_GET_CMDLINE 0x15
                          executable, that is, argc and argv.
                          Returns the system stack and heap
                          parameters. The values returned are
SYS_HEAPINFO    0x16
                          typically those used by the C library during
                          initialization.
                          Determines whether the return code from
                          another semihosting call is an error status
SYS_ISERROR     0x08      or not. This call is passed a parameter
                          block containing the error code to
                          examine.
                          Checks whether a file is connected to an
SYS_ISTTY       0x09
                          interactive device.
Semihosting    immediate
                         Description
operation      opcode
                         Opens a file on the host system. The file
                         path is specified either as relative to the
SYS_OPEN       0x01      current directory of the host process, or
                         absolute, using the path conventions of the
                         host operating system.
SYS_READ       0x06      Reads the contents of a file into a buffer.
SYS_READC      0x07      Reads a byte from the console.
                         Deletes a specified file on the host filing
SYS_REMOVE     0x0E
                         system.
SYS_RENAME     0x0F      Renames a specified file.
                         Seeks to a specified position in a file using
                         an offset specified from the start of the file.
SYS_SEEK       0x0A
                         The file is assumed to be a byte array and
                         the offset is given in bytes.
                         Passes a command to the host command-
                         line interpreter. This enables you to
SYS_SYSTEM     0x12      execute a system command such as dir,
                         ls, or pwd. The terminal I/O is on the host,
                         and is not visible to the target.
SYS_TICKFREQ   0x31      Returns the tick frequency.
                         Returns the number of seconds since 00:00
SYS_TIME       0x11
                         January 1, 1970.
                         Returns a temporary name for a file
SYS_TMPNAM     0x0D
                         identified by a system file identifier.
                         Writes the contents of a buffer to a
                         specified file at the current file position.
SYS_WRITE      0x05      Current OpenOCD implementation expects
                         that the buffer is terminated with the
                         newline character (\n).
                         Writes a character byte, pointed to by R1,
                         to the debug channel. When executed under
SYS_WRITEC     0x03
                         an ARM debugger, the character appears
                         on the host debugger console.
Semihosting   immediate
                        Description
operation     opcode
                        Writes a null-terminated string to the debug
                        channel. When executed under an ARM
SYS_WRITE0    0x04
                        debugger, the characters appear on the host
                        debugger console.
