27. Universal Serial Bus
In the nineties a group of seven companies126 decided to join their energies to
define and standardize a new hardware and communication standard to
interconnect peripherals to host computers. The goal of this consortium was to
unify the hardware mediums used to exchange data between peripherals and PCs,
while standardizing the communication protocol at the same time. Moreover,
with the advent of faster and powerful peripherals like external disk drives,
portable media players, digital cameras and so on, there were an increasing
demand of faster and reliable communication mediums.

Twenty-six years later, the Universal Serial Bus specification is still here, and it
has become the most relevant and widespread industry standard in consumer
electronics. During the years, several specifications have been released by the
USB Implementers Forum (USB-IF), the committee that defines all USB-related
standards. Every new release gives us a faster and more versatile communication
standard as well as more portable and flexible physical mediums and connectors.
The first USB 1.0 specification allowed to design devices able to exchange data
with a bandwidth up to 1.5Mbit/s. The most recent specification, the USB4
released in 2019, supports a maximum bandwidth of 40Gbit/s.

The market importance of the USB standard forced all the MCUs vendors to
adopt it in their most advanced devices, and obviously this is true for STM too.
All STM32 families include several P/Ns that provide complete hardware
support to at least the USB-device specification. Moreover, ST freely distributes
a Cube middleware that simplifies the effort needed to develop USB-based
applications.

From a conceptual point of view, the USB standard is not that obscure and
complex protocol. Thanks to internal and dedicated phythers, STM32 developers
can totally ignore all hardware-related aspects of the protocol (voltage signaling,
encoding of messages, etc.), while focusing exclusively on the software part.
However, things can become hard to rule when implementing “logical protocols”
on the top of the hardware medium. That’s the reason why USB is still
considered a hard-to-learn protocol by the majority of embedded programmers
and small companies, which prefer to use simpler and still widespread
communication protocols like the RS-232 and similar.
This chapter aims to provide a brief introduction to the topic. A complete
dissertation of the USB specification, especially of the most recent ones like the
USB 3.0, is outside of the scope of this book, and it would require a dedicated
text with almost the same number of pages. Instead, we will focus our attention
on the main concepts at the basis of the USB 2.0 specification, and we will
analyze the structure of the ST’s middleware designed for its STM32
microcontrollers.

27.1 USB 2.0 Specification Overview

For those of you totally new to USB127, it is important to master some relevant
concepts before starting to write code. To find good introductory guides to the
subject is hard. The most relevant work is the series of books by Ms. Janet
Louise Axelson (aka Jan Axelson), especially the “USB Complete” one. I think
that almost every USB developer has one copy of this book on his desk, and I
strongly suggest giving it a look if you are totally new to USB. Another good
starting point is represented by the AN57294 from Cypress (now part of
Infineon). This is an application note written by Robert Murphy, and the most of
it is independent from the Cypress’s hardware. I was inspired by that document
while writing down the introductory part of this chapter, and I suggest you give it
a look.
ST made a good series of videos about the USB 2.0 and the complete USB stack
available in the STM32Cube library. The videos are freely available on
Youtube.

In this section I will provide the most essential possible introduction. However, I
think that it is quite easy to get lost among the most relevant concepts. For this
reason, I am going to provide a quick overview to USB before showing several
details, so that you can have an overview to keep on hand while reading the next
sub-paragraphs.
Figure 1: The most widespread
                              USB plugs and receptacles

27.1.1 The “Before-To-Die” Guide to USB

Ok. There is no time to lose. This is the last opportunity to learn USB. Let us go.

The USB specification is declined in several releases. The most widespread
one, the USB 2.0, supports three bus speeds: 480Mbit/s (also named High Speed
- HS), 12Mbit/s (named Full Speed - FS), 1.5Mbit/s (named Low Speed - LS).
The last two are inherited from the USB 1.1 specification. This indicates another
important characteristic of the standard: new releases are designed to be
backward compatible.

During the years, several cables and connectors have been standardized. The
standard connectors were deliberately intended to enforce the directed topology
of a USB network: Type-A receptacles on host devices that supply power and
Type-B receptacles on target devices that draw power. This prevents users from
accidentally connecting two USB power supplies to each other, which could lead
to short circuits and dangerously high currents, circuit failures, or even fire. The
Figure 1 shows seven of the most widespread USB plugs and receptacles.

USB is host-centric. Every communication is between a host (usually a
computer) and a device. The host manages traffic on the wires, and the device
responds to communications from the host. USB is a bus. This means that when
the host is transmitting a packet of data, this is sent to every device connected to
it. Only one device, the addressed one, accepts the data (the others all receive it,
but being the address different, they silently ignore it).

A host exchanges packets with devices through “virtual pipes”, which are called
endpoints in the USB terminology. Each endpoint has one unique address, and
there exist a limited number of endpoints a device can use. This means that, from
the bus point-of-view, a packet is identified by a destination device address plus
an endpoint number. From the developer point-of-view, a device endpoint is a
memory buffer that stores received data or data to transmit. Together with an
address number, each endpoint is characterized by a direction and the maximum
dimension of the buffer, which clearly corresponds to the maximum number of
data bytes the endpoint can send or receive in a transaction. A special endpoint,
called endpoint zero (EP0) is always present in a USB device and it is used to
configure it by the host.

Each USB transfer consists of one or more transactions that can carry data to or
from an endpoint. A transaction begins with a “token packet” that specifies the
endpoint number and the transfer direction. A SETUP token packet is used to
configure the whole device or some features. An IN token packet requests a data
packet from the endpoint. An OUT token packet precedes a data packet from the
host. In addition to data, each data packet contains error-checking bits and a
Packet ID (PID) with a data-sequencing value. Many transactions also have a
handshake packet where the receiver of the data reports success or failure of the
transaction. To clarify: we use an IN endpoint to transfer data from the device to
the host, while we use an OUT endpoint to transfer data from the host to the
device. Remember: USB is a host-centric protocol.

USB 2.0 supports four transfer types: control, bulk, isochronous and interrupt.
In a control transfer, the host sends a defined request to the device. On device
attachment, the host uses control transfers to request a series of data structures
called descriptors from the device. The descriptors provide information about
the device’s capabilities and help the host decide what driver to assign to the
device. Control transfers have up to three stages: SETUP, DATA (optional), and
STATUS. The SETUP stage contains the request. The DATA stage contains data
from the host or device, depending on the request. The STATUS stage contains
information about the success of the transfer.

The other transfer types don’t have defined stages and it is up to the higher-level
software to define how to use and interpret the data contained in a message.

Bulk transfers are the fastest on an otherwise idle bus but have no guaranteed
timing. Printers and USB Virtual COM-Port (VCP) data use bulk transfers.
Isochronous transfers have guaranteed timing but no error correcting. Streaming
audio and video use these types of transfers.

Interrupt transfers have guaranteed maximum latency, or time between
transaction attempts. Mice, and keyboards use interrupt transfers. There is an
important thing to clarify: interrupt transfers have nothing related to
microcontroller’s interrupts. There are no dedicated interrupt lines that flow
between the host and connected devices. The USB 2.0 physical medium is made
of just two wires, named D+ and D-, apart from VCC and GND wires. An
interrupt transfer uses a dedicated endpoint which is constantly polled by the
host. These types of transfers allow to signal to the host that it must perform an
action, which depends on the specific protocol.

USB specification says nothing about the meaning of transferred bytes at
application level. This aspect is demanded to device classes, application
protocols that standardize the messages’ structure, their meaning, the number and
type of used endpoints and so on. The USB-IF standardizes some relevant
classes. For example, the Human Interface Device (HID) is the class dedicated
to standardizing devices such as mice, keyboards, joysticks and so on.

All USB devices have a hierarchy of descriptors which provide to the host
information such as what the device is, who makes it, what version of USB it
supports, how many ways it can be configured, the number of endpoints and their
types, etc. The more common USB descriptors are

     Device Descriptors: they provide an overall overview of the device
     functionalities.
     Interface Descriptors: they provide the description of the functionalities of
     a given device interface (for example, in a mouse the interface descriptors
     provide information regarding the HID class).
     Endpoint Descriptors: these descriptors are used to describe endpoints
     other than endpoint zero. The host will use the information returned from
     these descriptors to determine the bandwidth requirements of the bus.
     String Descriptors: String descriptors provide human readable
     information.

And that’s all folks. We are now gurus of the USB protocol.
More or less.
Figure 2: USB tiered topology

27.1.2 USB Physical Architecture Overview

As said before, USB is a host-centric serial bus protocol. On a USB bus can
exist just one host that acts as a “master”, which schedules the messages flowing
on the bus. Up to 127 “slave” devices can coexist on the same bus. Host and
devices are interconnected through dedicated and transparent devices, named
hubs. The USB has a tiered star topology (Figure 2). At the root tier is the USB
host. All devices connect to the host either directly or via a hub. According to the
USB specification, a USB host can only support a maximum of seven tiers.

Basically, every host device is made of two fundamental components: a Host
Controller Interface (HCI) and a root hub. A host controller is a dedicated IC
that implements all the hardware requirements and part of the protocol logic to
handle the flowing of messages between host and devices. There exist four main
“standardized” PC host controllers on the market (OHCI, UHCI, EHCI and
xHCI). From this dissertation’s point-of-view, it is important to know that an HCI
is a complex piece of hardware. As far as I know, there not exist on the market
Cortex-M microcontrollers that provide a USB 2.0 HCI. Instead, several MCUs,
like some STM32 microcontrollers, provide the ability to work as USB FS host
implementing a limited set of capabilities. This allows to develop USB host
devices able to interface some common and not so fast USB devices (mice,
keyboards, etc.).
Figure 3: USB architecture overview

The USB specification can also be seen as a tiered architecture, which is
schematized in Figure 3. USB can be divided in three main tiers: the bus
interface, the device and the application layer.

The bus interface layer is represented by the hardware controller. A PC
integrates an HCI, while an STM32 MCU provides a dedicated hardware
phyther, compatible with the signaling of the USB 2.0 specifications, plus a
Serial Interface Engine (SIE). The SIE is the frontend of the hardware layer and
handles most of the protocol described in the USB specification. The SIE
typically comprehends signaling up to the transaction level. The functions that it
handles include:

     Packet recognition, transaction sequencing
     SOP, EOP, RESET, RESUME signal detection/generation
     Clock/Data separation
     NRZI Data encoding/decoding and bit-stuffing
     CRC generation and checking (Token and Data)
     Packet ID (PID) generation and checking/decoding
     Serial-Parallel/Parallel-Serial Conversion

The device layer corresponds to the software low-level part in a USB
connection. It contains both some generic USB functionalities (such as device
descriptors used to discover device’s capabilities, as we will see later) and
protocol specific functionalities. For example, a Mass Storage Class (MSC)
device implements all those functionalities that allow to interface an external
disk drive to a PC. At the same time, a PC Operating System (e.g., Windows)
needs a dedicated “driver” to interface such a USB device.

The application layer implements the necessary logic to use the device. From
the USB device’s point-of-view, this layer implements the actual code that
provides a given functionality. For example, our MSC device may implement the
necessary code so that an SD card is interfaced using the SPI protocol, and it
appears to a PC like any other MSC device (that is, an external disk). The MSC
protocol is essentially made of SCSI commands that need to be adapted to
specific Memory Technology Device (MTD) by the application code.

Figure 4: The wiring of a USB 2.0 cable

The USB-IF also standardizes the hardware mediums to interconnect USB
devices: plugs, sockets and cables. Figure 4 shows the typical structure of a
USB 2.0 cable. A shield made of a braid and a foil (plus the drain wire that
ensures correct grounding of the braid) surrounds power and signal wires. Power
conductors are used to supply adequate energy to devices. The red wire, which
is also named VBUS, gives a constant 4.40 - 5.25V supply to all attached
devices. A USB 2.0 end device can draw up to 500mA from the USB line. More
recent USB 3.x standard allows to supply up to 5A@20V (100W).

While USB supplies up to 5.25V to devices, the data lines (D+ and D-) function
at 3.3V. Data lines are a differential twisted pair. The reason for using the
differential D+ and D- signal is for rejecting common-mode noise. If noise
becomes coupled into the cable, it will normally be present on all wires in the
cable. With the use of a differential amplifier in the USB hardware internal to the
host and device, the common-mode noise can be rejected. USB 2.0 uses the
inverted non-return zero encoding (NRZI) schema to encode binary signals.

Over the years a series of connectors have been standardized by the USB-IF.
Historically, connectors (which include plugs and sockets) was divided in two
main categories: Type-A and Type-B. Hosts always use a Type-A ports and
connectors, while devices use Type-B ports and connectors. Initially, the USB
specification included only the larger Type-A and Type-B connectors for devices
but later included the Mini and Micro connections (see Figure 1).
These Mini and Micro connectors were initially developed for USB On-the-Go
(USB OTG), which is a USB specification that allows devices that would
normally act as slaves to become hosts. However, due to the smaller size of the
Mini-B and Micro-B connectors compared to Type-B, they were adopted in
many electronics despite lacking USB OTG capabilities.

The evolution of standards, and the market pressure from other players (Apple
with its Lightning standard for iPhone/IPad), forced the USB-IF to introduce a
fully symmetrical connector. With the advent of the USB 3.1 standard in 2014, the
USB-IF introduced Type-C connectors, which use the same layout both for the
host and devices.

Currently, the USB specification defines seven speeds for a USB system: Low-
Speed, Full-Speed, Hi-Speed, SuperSpeed 5/10/20/40GB. At the time of writing
this chapter, the majority of STM32 MCUs with a USB peripheral support just
Full-Speed mode, while the most performant ones also USB 2.0 High-Speed.

Low-, Full-, and High-Speed devices are often advertised as 1.5 Mb/s, 12 Mb/s,
and 480 Mb/s, respectively. However, these are bus rates and not data rates. The
actual data rates are affected by bus loading, transfer type, overhead, OS, and so
forth.

When a USB device is connected to a host, the speed of the device needs to be
detected. This is done with pull-up resistors on the D+ or D- lines. A 1.5-kΩ
pull-up on the D+ line indicates that the attached device is a Full-Speed device.
A 1.5KΩ pull-up resistor on the D- line indicates the attached device is a Low-
Speed device. High-Speed devices start as Full-Speed devices, so they have a
1.5KΩ pull-up on the D+ line. When the device is connected, it emits a sequence
of signals over D+/D- lines during the reset phase of enumeration. If the hub
supports High-Speed, then the pull-up resistor is removed. Apart for MCU from
the STM32F1-series, the majority of STM32 MCUs provide internal 1.5KΩ
pull-up resistors and there is no need to add them as external components.

A Low-Speed and Full-Speed USB device will use a 48-MHz clock for the SIE
and the other USB clocking purposes. This 48-MHz clock and the bus speed is
what will determine USB bit times:

     Full-Speed: 48 MHz / 12 Mb/s = 4 clocks per bit time.
     Low-Speed: 48 MHz / 1.5 Mb/s = 32 clocks per bit time.
Several STM32 MCUs, especially those belonging to low-cost value lines,
provide an integrated 48MHz RC network, so that you can save space and BOM
cost (they are called USB crystal-less MCUs).

27.1.3 USB Logical Architecture Overview

As STM32 developer, you do not need to dig into physical-related aspects of the
USB 2.0 specification. ST engineers packed all the hardware circuitry that
implements the phyther and the SIE inside the chip. Instead, as programmers, it is
paramount to understand the USB 2.0 logical architecture and its state machine.

27.1.3.1 Device States

When a USB 2.0 device is inserted in the host/hub port, a series of non-trivial
things take place. This process is named Enumeration and it is made up of an
electrical phase and a software stage. We will start analyzing the electrical part.

When a USB 2.0 is inserted in a Type-A port, both the host/hub and the end
device go through a well-defined set of states.

     ATTACHED: occurs when a device is attached to a host/hub but does not
     give any power to the VBUS line.
     POWERED: a device is attached to the USB and has been powered but has
     not yet received a reset request. A device in this state cannot draw more
     than 100mA.
     DEFAULT: a device is attached to the USB, is powered, and has been reset
     by the host. At this point, the device does not have a unique device address.
     The device responds to address 0.
     ADDRESSED: the device is attached to the USB, powered, has been reset,
     and has had a unique address assigned to it. The device however has not yet
     been configured.
     CONFIGURED: the device is attached to the USB, powered, has been
     reset, assigned a unique address, has been configured, and is not in suspend
     state. At this point, bus-powered devices can draw more than 100 mA.
     SUSPENDED: this state occurs when the device is attached and configured
     but has not seen activity on the bus for 3ms.

Let us analyze better each one of them.
ATTACHED
The user wants to use his USB device. He so gently inserts the device in the hub
port. According to the limited experience of this author, what happens
immediately after the device insertion is largely implementation dependent.
Some hub controllers leave the VBUS line disconnected, and they are designed
to sense a variation of the D+/D- lines capacitance. According to USB physical
specification, data lines must have a well characterized bus capacitance, and
some controllers are designed to measure it. On a capacitance variation (which
drops to few pF), they start powering the VBUS line and begin the device speed
identification phase.

Other hub controllers are designed to detect an over-current event on the VBUS
line. When the device is inserted, the device starts drawing a lot of current due to
the limited resistance in the very beginning insertion phase. The hub detects this
event, and it detaches the VBUS line. It then re-powers the VBUS line and starts
the device identification phase.

Finally, other controllers provide a standardized Attach Detection Protocol
(ADP). The hub performs attach probing by discharging the VBUS line, then
measuring the time required for a well-known current to charge the line to a
defined voltage. If the line does not charge in the expected time, no device is
present. The probing repeats about every 1.75s.

POWERED
Once the device insertion is complete (the device is hence in the ATTACHED
state) the hub start powering it by supplying up to 100mA. In this phase starts the
device speed identification. On attaching to a port, the device connects to the bus
by bringing the appropriate pull-up line high (according to its speed). The value
of the pull-up resistor allows to derive the device speed. The device is so in the
POWERED state, and the hub knows which physical protocol (according to the
speed) to use to exchange data with it.

DEFAULT
The host is notified by the hub of a new device. It so asks to the hub to reset the
corresponding port. A well-defined reset sequence takes place, which consists in
pulling down both the data lines for at least 10ms. This is the very first bus
condition that the microcontroller notifies to the developer. This give us the
opportunity to start the early configuration of the microcontrollers, so that the
USB peripheral is able to answer to further requests coming from the host. When
the reset condition ends, the device is said to be in the DEFAULT state. In this
state, the host/hub also samples the data line to understand if the device supports
the High-Speed mode, by issuing special signals over data lines.

ADDRESSED
A device in the DEFAULT state answers to host on the 0x0 address. As said
before, USB 2.0 is a broadcast protocol. All devices receive the same messages,
but they discard those not having its device address. When a device is inserted in
the hub port, it automatically sets the default address to 0x0. Since the host
enumerates one device at time (by physically powering a port at a time), only
one device will answer to communications sent to 0x0 address. The host is so
able to communicate with the device, and it start asking a series of bytes that
describe the device. These bytes are called device descriptors and we will
analyze them in depth later.

What happens next is dependent on the Operating System and application layer.
Some older Windows releases reset again the device (and, sometimes, again
again…). The device descriptor is polled again and if the operation succeeds,
then the host assigns a unique address to the device. Some other OSes, instead,
skip this additional reset and assign the address. The device is so
ADDRESSED, and the host can ask for additional information.

CONFIGURED
The host learns about complete device’s capability by reading device’s
descriptors using the assigned addressed. The list of required information may be
long, and we will analyze the most of them later. Some of them include the
device powering needs: if the device needs to draw more than 100mA, it must
notify the host so that it “authorizes” it to increase the power consumption. Other
information gathered by the host concerns the number and types of
communication channels (endpoints), the maximum dimension of communication
buffers, and so on. At the end of this inquiring stage, the Operating System also
selects and activates the device driver needed to interact with the device. Once
all these operations are complete, the device is in the CONFIGURED state, and
it is ready to accept higher level messages from the application software.

SUSPENDED
A device enters in this state after detecting no bus activity for at least 3ms. In the
SUSPENDED state the device should limit its use of the bus power. Both
configured and unconfigured devices must support this state. We will see more
about this later.

27.1.3.2 Communication Endpoints

In USB 2.0, host and devices communicate through virtual pipes. Every message
is addressed to a specific device and a given communication pipe. There are two
types of pipes in a USB 2.0 system: control pipes and data pipes. For every
device exists just one control pipe and a variable number of data pipes,
according to the device functionalities. For example, a mouse will typically have
the control pipe plus one data pipe used to send pointer coordinates to the PC.
The control pipe is the only bidirectional pipe in the USB system. All the data
pipes are instead unidirectional.

Figure 5: USB endpoint/pipe model

The USB specification defines four different data transfer types. The type of pipe
used depends on the characteristic of the data to transfer. Let us analyze them.

CONTROL TRANSFERS
Control transfers send and receive device information across the bus. They are
used for sending commands to the device, make inquiries, and configure the
device. This transfer uses the control pipe. For example, the host sets the
device’s address by using a control transfer. The advantage of control transfers is
guaranteed accuracy. Errors that occur are properly detected and the data is
resent. Control transfers have a 10% reserved bandwidth on the bus in Low- and
Full-Speed devices and 20% in High-Speed devices.

INTERRUPT TRANSFERS
These transfers are used on devices that must use a high reliability method to
communicate a small amount of data. This is commonly used in HID devices,
such as mice and keyboards. The name of this transfer can be misleading. It is not
truly a dedicated interrupt line flowing from the device to the host but uses a
polling rate. However, you get a guarantee that the host checks for data at a
predictable interval. Interrupt transfers give guaranteed accuracy as errors are
properly detected and faulty transactions are retried at the next transaction.
Interrupt transfers have a guaranteed bandwidth of 90% in Low- and Full-Speed
devices and 80% in High-Speed devices. This bandwidth is shared with
isochronous transfers. Interrupt maximum packet size is a function of device
speed. High-Speed capable devices support a maximum packet size of 1024
byes. Full-Speed capable devices support a maximum packet size of 64 bytes.
Low-Speed devices support a maximum packet size of 8 bytes. This type of
transfers uses a data pipe.

BULK TRANSFERS
These transfers are commonly used on devices that move relatively large
amounts of data at highly variable times where the transfers can use any
available bandwidth space. They are the most common transfer type for USB
devices. Delivery time with a bulk transfer is variable because there is no set
aside bandwidth for the transfer. The delivery time varies depending on how
much bandwidth on the bus is available, which makes the actual delivery time
unpredictable. Bulk transfers give guaranteed accuracy because errors are
properly detected, and transactions are resent. Bulk transfers are useful in
moving large amounts of data that are not time sensitive. A bulk transfer
maximum packet size is a function of device speed. High-Speed capable devices
support a maximum packet size of 512 bytes. Full-Speed capable devices
support a maximum packet size of 64-bytes. Low-Speed devices do not support
bulk transfer types. These transfers use a data pipe.

ISOCHRONOUS TRANSFERS
These transfers are continuous and real-time transfers with a pre-negotiated
bandwidth. Isochronous transfers must support streams of error tolerant data
because they do not have an error recovery mechanism or handshaking. Errors
are detected through the CRC field, but not corrected. With isochronous transfers,
you get the tradeoff of guaranteed delivery versus guaranteed accuracy.
Streaming music or video are examples of an application that uses isochronous
endpoints because the occasional missed data is ignored by the human ears and
eyes. Isochronous transfers have a guaranteed bandwidth of 90% in Low- and
Full-Speed devices (80% in High-Speed devices) that is shared with interrupt
endpoints. High-Speed capable devices support a maximum packet size of 1024
bytes. Full-Speed devices support a maximum packet size of 1023 bytes. Low-
Speed devices do not support isochronous transfer types.
There are special considerations with isochronous transfers. You generally want
3x buffering to ensure data is ready to go by having one actively transmitting
buffer and another buffer being actively loaded. These transfers use a data pipe.

Control and data pipes are an abstraction built on the top of device endpoints. In
the USB specification, a device endpoint is a uniquely addressable portion of a
USB device that is the source or sink of information in a communication flow
between the host and device. There are four types of endpoints that correspond
to the transfer types seen before: control, interrupt, bulk and isochronous
endpoints.

An endpoint is defined by two parameters: a unique address for a given device
and a direction. An IN endpoint is used to transfer data from the device to the
host. An OUT endpoint to transfer data from the host to the device. The control
endpoint, named SETUP, is a special endpoint that has the 0x0 address and it is
the sole bidirectional endpoint in a USB system: programmers will refer to it to
send and receive data from the host. The control endpoint is the only required
endpoint in a USB system, and there exist classes that just communicate through
the SETUP endpoint (for example, the DFU class). During the enumeration
process, the host sends and receive messages through the control endpoint to
acquire device capabilities and to configure it. The control endpoint ensures that
the host has a default way to access to device without knowing the actual
implemented functionalities. Endpoints are bidirectional by nature. It is not until
they are configured that they take on a single direction (becoming unidirectional).
Endpoint 1 (shortened EP1), for example, can be either an IN or OUT endpoint.
It is in the device configuration that it will officially make EP1 an IN endpoint.

At the basis of USB 2.0 specification there is an important concept to keep in
mind. As said several other times before, USB is a host centric protocol. All
transactions originate by the host, regardless of the endpoint direction. If the host
needs to send data to device, it writes a given number of bytes in an OUT
endpoint. If, instead, the device needs to send data to the host, it writes the data
in an IN endpoint and waits until the host reads it. From the firmware point of
view, the device is notified of transfer completion (in both directions) thanks to a
dedicated interrupt. As we will see later, the USB protocol is a complete
interrupt-driven protocol, and this heavily impacts on the structure of our
embedded application (and on the possibility to debug it easily).
In addition to the EP0, the number of endpoints supported in any device is based
on its design requirements. A simple design such as a mouse may need only one
IN endpoint. More complex designs may need several data endpoints. The USB
specification sets a limit on the number of endpoints to 16 for each direction (16
IN/16 OUT – 32 Total) for High-Speed and Full-Speed devices, which does not
include the control endpoints 0 IN and 0 OUT. However, STM32
microcontrollers provide less endpoints (usually a total of eight, including EP0,
but for some STM32MCU even less). Low-Speed devices are limited to two
endpoints.

Endpoints use cyclic redundancy checks (CRCs) to detect errors in transactions.
The CRC is a calculated value used for error checking. The actual calculation
equation is explained in the USB specification and the handling of these
calculations is taken care of by the USB hardware so that the proper response
can be issued. The recipient of a transaction checks the CRC against the data. If
the two match, then the receiver issues an ACK. If the data and the CRC do not
match, then no handshake is sent. This lack of a handshake tells the sender to try
again.

Table 1 summarizes the four endpoint types and their relevant characteristics.

Table 1: Endpoint types and their relative features

27.1.4 USB 2.0 Communication Protocol Overview
       If you are new to the USB 2.0 protocol, it is not strictly required that you study this paragraph and
       its subparagraphs in this phase. The information provided here is mostly handled in hardware and
       by the CubeHAL. The transaction protocol is essentially transparent for the programmer, unless he
       needs to debug the device using a protocol analyzer (more about this later). I suggest skipping this
       part and to go to the next paragraph about device descriptors.

From the developer’s point-of-view, a USB 2.0 message consists of a stream of
bytes whose meaning depends on the message type. For example, a mouse sends
to the host several data messages using an interrupt endpoint. The exchanged data
contains relative coordinates that are used to move the pointer on the screen.

From the USB point-of-view, a message is a series of frames, as shown in
Figure 6. Each frame consists of a Start of Frame (SOF) followed by one or
more transactions. Each transaction is made up of a series of packets. A packet
is preceded with a packet id and a sync pattern and ends with an End of Packet
(EOP) pattern. Depending on the transaction type there may be one or more data
packets and some transactions may or may not have a handshake packet. At a
minimum, a transaction has a token packet.

Figure 6: USB communication in a given time-frame

Each packet can contain different pieces of information. What information is
included depends on the packet type. The following is a list of the potential
information that can be included with a packet:

     Packet ID (PID): declares a transaction type as an IN/OUT/SETUP/SOF.
     Optional Device Address: specifies the device which the message is
     addressed to.
     Optional Endpoint Address: specifies the endpoint address between 1 and
     16 (between 1 and 7 for all STM32 MCUs).
     Optional Payload Data: depending on the packet type and USB version,
     this can contain up to 1024 bytes of data, whose mining is related to the
     packet type.
     Optional CRC.

27.1.4.1 Packet Types

According to USB 2.0 specification, there exist four types of packets with a
given fixed structure:

     Token packets
         Initiate transaction
         Identify device involved in transaction
         Always sourced by the host
     Data packets
         Deliver payload data
         Sourced by host or device
     Handshake packets:
         Acknowledge error-free data receipt
         Sourced by host or device
     Special packets
         Facilitates speed differentials
         Sourced by host-to-hub devices

Let us analyze these packet types in depth.

TOKEN PACKET
Token packets always originate from the host and are used to control the traffic
on the bus. The function of the token packet depends on the activity performed.
IN tokens are used to request that devices send data to the host.
OUT tokens are used to precede data from the host.
SETUP tokens are used to precede control commands from the host.
SOF tokens are used to mark time frames. In every IN, OUT, and SETUP token
packet there is a 7-bit device address, 4-bit endpoint ID, and 5-bit CRC. Figure
7 shows the structure of the five types of token packets.
Figure 7: Types of Token packets in USB 2.0

SOF packets give a way for devices to identify the beginning of a frame and
synchronize with the host. They are also used to prevent a device from entering
suspend mode (which it must do if 3ms pass without an SOF). SOF packets are
only seen on full- and high-speed devices and are sent every millisecond. A
handshake packet does not occur for an SOF packet. High-speed communication
goes a step further with microframes. With a High-Speed device, an SOF is sent
out every 125µs and frame count is only incremented every 1ms.

DATA PACKET
Data packets follow IN, OUT, and SETUP token packets. The size of the
payload data ranges from 0 to 1024 bytes depending on the transfer type and the
USB version. The Packet ID toggles between DATA0 and DATA1 for LS/FS
devices, and DATA0/1/2/MDATA for HS devices. The packet closes with a 16-
bit CRC. The composition of a data packet can be seen in Figure 7. The data
toggle is updated at the host and the device for each successful data packet
transfer. One advantage to the data toggle is that it acts as an additional error
detection method. If a different packet ID is received than what is expected, the
device will be able to know there was an error in the transfer and it can be
handled appropriately. An example where the data toggle is used is if an ACK is
sent but not received. In this instance, the sender updates the data toggle from 1 to
0 but the receiver does not. The receiver remains at 1. This causes the host and
device to be out of sync on the next data stage, which indicates an error.

HANDSHAKE PACKETS
Handshake packets conclude each transaction. Each handshake includes an 8-bit
packet ID and is sent by the receiver of the transaction. Each USB speed has
several options for a handshake response. Which ones are supported depend on
the USB speed:

     ACK: acknowledges successful completion. (LS/FS/HS)
       NAK: negative acknowledgement. (LS/FS/HS)
       STALL: Error indication sent by a device. (LS/FS/HS)
       NYET: indicates the device is not ready to receive another data packet. (HS
       Only)

SPECIAL PACKETS
The USB specification defines four special packets.

       PRE: it is issued to hubs by the host to indicate that the next packet is low
       speed.
       SPLIT: Precedes a token packet to indicate a split transaction. (HS Only)
       ERR: Returned by a hub to report an error in a split transaction. (HS Only)
       PING: Checks the status for a Bulk OUT or Control Write after receiving a
       NYET handshake. (HS Only)

27.1.4.2 Transaction Types

SETUP, IN and OUT tokens determine three different transaction types. Let us
briefly look at them.

27.1.4.2.1 Control Transactions

Control transactions identify, configure, and control devices. They enable the
host to read information about a device, set the device address, establish
configuration, read an endpoint configuration, issue certain class-related
commands and so on. In the enumeration phase, a control transfer is always
directed to the control endpoint of a device (which is always the EP0). After the
device is completely enumerated, control transfers can be addressed to other
endpoints to interact with other device aspects, such as its class (but this is quite
uncommon).
Figure 8: An example of a Control transaction

Control transactions have three stages: the setup stage (mandatory), the data
stage (optional), and the status stage (mandatory). The status stage includes a
single IN or OUT transaction that reports on the success or failure of the
previous stages. The data packet for this stage is always DATA1 (unlike normal
IN and OUT transactions that toggle between DATA0 and DATA1) and contains
a zero-length data packet. The status stage ends with a handshake transaction that
is sent by the receiver of the preceding packet.

Figure 8 shows a complete control transaction issued by the host to setup the
device address. The packets 11, 12 and 13 identify the setup stage.

Packet 11 is the token packet with a PID equal to SETUP, a destination address
equal to 0x0 (corresponding to the new device which is currently in DEFAULT
state) and an endpoint ID corresponding to the control endpoint EP0.

Packet 12 is the data packet that contains the effective request to the device. It
contains the SET_ADDRESS command and the corresponding address ID.

Packet 13 is the ACK packet issued by the device. This control transaction has
no data stage.

Finally, transaction 14 (made of packets 15, 16 and 17) corresponds to the status
stage (see the empty DATA1 packet).
Table 2: Structure of a SETUP token

The content of the data packet right after the SETUP token packet has a well-
defined structure which is reported in Table 2. As you can see, a SETUP packet
can be sent to a device, an interface (more about this later) or an endpoint. When
a SETUP packet is addressed to a device
(bmRequestType.Type=0/bmRequestType.Recipient=0), we talk about a
Standard Device Request, and the content of the fields bRequest, wValue,
wIndex and wLength correspond to one of the rows in the Table 3. As you can
see, the SET_ADDRESS request has this structure:

     wValue: it is the address assigned to the new device;
     wIndex: not used field and set to zero;
     wLength: not used field and set to zero;
     Data: the request has no data stage.

The rest of Standard Device Requests have the following usages:

     GET_STATUS: the request is directed at the device, which will return two
     bytes during the data stage indicating if the device is self-powered and if it
     has a remote wakeup feature and it can wake the host up during suspend (for
     example, a click on a mouse button can wake-up the host).
     CLEAR_FEATURE and SET_FEATURE: these requests can be used to set
     Boolean features. When the designated recipient is the device, the only two
     feature selectors available are DEVICE_REMOTE_WAKEUP and TEST_MODE.
     Test mode allows the device to exhibit various conditions. These are further
     documented in the USB Specification Revision 2.0.
     GET_DESCRIPTOR and SET_DESCRIPTOR: these requests are used to
     set/return the specified descriptor in wValue. A request for the
     configuration descriptor will return the device descriptor and all interface
     and endpoint descriptors in the one request. More about descriptors in a
     while.
     GET_CONFIGURATION and SET_CONFIGURATION: these requests are used to
     return or set the current device configuration. In the case of a
     GET_CONFIGURATION request, a byte will be returned during the data stage
     indicating the devices status. A zero value means the device is not
     configured and a non-zero value indicates the device is configured.
     SET_CONFIGURATION is used to enable a device. It should contain the value
     of bConfigurationValue of the desired configuration descriptor in the
     lower byte of wValue to select which configuration to enable.

Table 3: List of requests in a Standard Device Request

When a control transaction is addressed to an interface
(bmRequestType.Type=0 / bmRequestType.Recipient=1), we talk about a
Standard Interface Request. In this case, the fields of the request can assume the
values reported in Table 4. Most of the requests reported in Table 4 are reserved
for future usage, apart for the GET_INTERFACE and SET_INTERFACE requests that
allows to switch between alternate interfaces configuration, a feature we will
describe later.
Table 4: List of requests in a Standard Interface Request

When a control transaction is addressed to an endpoint
(bmRequestType.Type=0 / bmRequestType.Recipient=2), we talk about a
Standard Endpoint Request. In this case, the fields of the request can assume the
values reported in Table 5. The GET_STATUS request returns two bytes indicating
the status (Halted/Stalled) of an endpoint. CLEAR_FEATURE and SET_FEATURE are
used to set Endpoint Features. The standard currently defines one endpoint
feature selector, ENDPOINT_HALT (0x00) which allows the host to stall and
clear an endpoint. Only endpoints other than the default endpoint are
recommended to have this functionality. Finally, a SYNCH_FRAME request is used
to report an endpoint synchronization frame.

Table 5: List of requests in a Standard Endpoint Request

Finally, when a control transaction is addressed to an interface and its type is
Class ((bmRequestType.Type=1 / bmRequestType.Recipient=1), we talk
about a Class Request. Class requests are a set of class-specific requests
defined by the class itself. These requests allow the host to inquire about the
capabilities and state of a specific device and to set the state of output and
feature items. We will analyze some class-specific requests later in this chapter.

27.1.4.2.2 IN/OUT Transactions

IN transactions refer to a data transfer from the device to the host. They are
addressed to an endpoint different from EP0. These transactions are initiated by
the host by sending an IN token packet. The target device responds by sending
one or more data packets, and the host responds with a handshake packet. The
device could not be able to answer to the host request: if this the case, the device
needs to answer with a NAK. The host will keep retrying the request by sending
again the same transaction.

Conversely, OUT transactions refer to a transfer that occurs from the host to the
device. In this type of transaction, the host sends the appropriate token packet
(either OUT or SETUP) and follows with one or more data packets. The receiving
device ends the transaction by sending the appropriate handshake packet. The
device could not be able to accept the data from the host: if this the case, the
device needs to answer with a NYET or NAK128. The host will keep retrying the
request by sending again the same transaction.

For example, look at the bulk transaction in Figure 9. The transaction 5244 is an
OUT transaction ending with a NYET from the device. The host send a PING
packet, and even if the device acknowledges the PING, it refuses the subsequent
data in the OUT transaction (packet 5249) by issuing a NYET. Successive
transaction (5252) will succeed instead (look to the ACK packet #5258).
Figure 9: An example of a OUT transaction

27.1.4.3 Device and Interface Descriptors

A communication between a host and a USB device is just a matter of bytes
flowing through one or more endpoints. Apart for the control endpoint (EP0),
every endpoint can assume both the IN and the OUT function, and the bytes
transferred assume a given meaning according to the device characteristics,
especially the implemented USB class (HID, CDC, MSC, etc.). So, there should
be a way so that a device communicates to the host what features it implements,
how many endpoints uses, how much current it draws, and so on. Finally, the
same device must provide to the Operating System other non-neglectable
information such as device and vendor names, so that the end user can be warned
regarding the device activity and usage. In the USB protocol this task is
demanded to descriptors, tables hardcoded inside the FW that strictly adhere to a
well-defined structure and that are exchanged with the host during the
enumeration phase. USB 2.0 defines four different types of descriptors, as
shown in Figure 10. Let us briefly analyze them.

Figure 10: Complete hierarchy of a device descriptors

27.1.4.3.1 Device Descriptors

Device descriptors give the host information such as the USB specification to
which the device conforms, the number of device configurations, protocols
(classes) supported by the device, Vendor Identification (also known as VID,
which is an unique identifiers that each company gets from the USB Implementers
Forum), Product Identification (also known as PID, different from a packet ID,
which every company choose uniquely), and a serial number if the device has
one. The device descriptor is where some of the most crucial information about
the USB device is contained. Table 6 shows the structure for a device descriptor.
Let us analyze individual fields.
Table 6: Structure of a device descriptor

bLength: this field corresponds to the total length in bytes of the device
descriptor. This value it is fixed by the USB standard.
bDescriptorType: identifies the device descriptor type and it corresponds
to 01h for device descriptors table.
bcdUSB: this field reports the USB revision that the device supports, which
should be latest supported revision. This is a binary-coded decimal value
that uses a format of 0xAABC, where A is the major version number, B is
the minor version number, and C is the sub-minor version number. For
example, a USB 2.0 device would have a value of 0x0200 and USB 1.1
would have a value of 0x0110. This is normally used by the host in
determining which driver to load.
bDeviceClass, bDeviceSubClass, bDeviceProtocol: these fields are
used by the operating system to identify a driver for a USB device during
the enumeration process. Filling in this field in the device descriptor
prevents different interfaces from functioning independently, such as a
composite device. Most USB devices define their classes in the interface
descriptor and leave these fields as 00h.
bMaxPacketSize: this field reports the maximum number of packets
supported by the EP0. Depending on the device, the possible sizes are 8
bytes, 16 bytes, 32 bytes, and 64 bytes.
iManufacturer, iProduct, iSerialNumber: these fields are indexes in
the table of string descriptors. String descriptors give details about the
manufacturer, product, and serial number. If string descriptors exist, these
       variables should point to their index location in the strings tables. If no
       string exists, then the respective field should be assigned a value of zero.
       bNumConfigurations: this field defines the total number of configurations
       the device can support. Multiple configurations allow the device to be
       configured differently depending on certain conditions such as being bus
       powered or self-powered. More details regarding this stuff are discussed in
       the next paragraph.

27.1.4.3.2 Configuration Descriptors

Configuration descriptors provide information regarding a specific configuration
of the device, such as the number of interfaces, if the device is self-powered or
bus-powered, if it can wake up the host (remote wake-up) upon an event (for
example, a mouse can wake up the Host PC if one of it is button is pressed). A
device must provide at least one configuration, but it may provide multiple
configurations. For example, a device may expose some functionalities just if it
is self-powered by an external power adapter. However, while the USB standard
provides such flexibility for both FW and HW developers, it is quite uncommon
to find USB devices with multiple configurations in practice. Table 7 shows the
structure for a configuration descriptor. Let us analyze individual fields.

       wTotalLength: this field corresponds to the total length in bytes of the
       configuration descriptor, including the interface and endpoint descriptors.
       This value it is fixed by the USB standard.
       bNumInterfaces: this field defines the total number of possible interfaces
       in this configuration. This field has a minimum value of 1.
       bConfigurationValue: it defines a value to use as an argument to the
       SET_CONFIGURATION request to select this configuration.
       bmAttributes: it defines parameters for the USB device. If the device is
       bus powered, bit 6 is set to 0, if the device is self-powered, then bit 6 is set
       to 1. If the USB device supports remote wake-up, bit 5 is set to 1. If remote
       wake-up is not supported, bit 5 is set to 0.
       bMaxPower: this field defines the maximum power consumption drawn from
       the bus when the device is fully operational, expressed in 2 mA units. If a
       self-powered device becomes detached from its external power source, it
       may not draw more than the value indicated in this field.
Table 7: Structure of a configuration descriptor

27.1.4.3.3 Interface Descriptors

An interface descriptor describes a specific interface within a configuration. The
number of endpoints for an interface is identified in this descriptor. The interface
descriptor is also where the USB Class of the device is declared. There are
many predefined classes that a USB device can be, many of which are listed in
Table 11. A USB device class identifies the device functionality and aids in the
loading of a proper driver for that specific functionality. Table 8 shows the
structure for an interface descriptor. Let us analyze individual fields.

       bInterfaceNumber: this field corresponds to the interface number.
       bAlternateSetting: an interface may have alternative configurations
       selected by using the SET_INTERFACE request. For example, a USB
       interface endpoints may act as INTERRUPT pipes in normal settings, but
       might act as BULK pipe in alternate settings providing you the facility of
       two different mode on the same interface. Like for the multi-configuration
       support, this possibility is offered by the USB protocol, but it has few
       practical applications.
       bNumEndpoints: specifies the number of endpoints used by the interface
       excluding the control endpoint EP0.
       bInterfaceClass, bInterfaceSubclass, bInterfaceProtocol: these
       fields refer to the USB class and protocol exposed by the current interface.
       Some classes are well defined and standardized by the USB-IF. We will
       talk about this later.
       iInterface: this field refers to the index in the string descriptor containing
       the human-readable description.
Table 8: Structure of an interface descriptor

27.1.4.3.4 Endpoint Descriptors

Each endpoint used for an interface has its own descriptor. This descriptor
contains the information required by the host to determine the characteristics of
each endpoint. An endpoint descriptor is always returned as part of the
configuration information. There is no descriptor for endpoint zero. Table 9
shows the structure for an endpoint descriptor. Let us analyze individual fields.

       bEndpointAddress: this field defines the endpoint address and its
       direction. In all STM32 it is possible to configure just eight endpoints
       including the EP0. The EP0 is the sole bidirectional endpoint. Instead, for
       the other seven endpoints a direction must be specified by setting the eighth
       bit in this field. For example, a value 0x01 corresponds to an OUT
       endpoint with address 0x01, while a value 0x82 corresponds to an IN
       endpoint with address 0x02.
       bmAttributes: this field is a bitmask used to set type of endpoint. The first
       two bits set the endpoint type. If the endpoint type is set to isochronous, then
       the next two bits in the bitmask set the type of synchronization129 and the
       next twos are used to set feedback endpoints for audio feedback loop.
Table 9: Structure of an endpoint descriptor

       wMaxPacketSize: this field sets the dimension of the packet size on the
       endpoint. Every endpoint type can accept a maximum amount of data
       depending on the USB protocol specifications (LS/FS/HS). Please, refer to
       the Table 1 for this value.
       bInterval: this field sets the polling interval in milliseconds for interrupt
       endpoints. Remember: interrupt endpoints are not truly “interrupts” since
       every transaction on the USB bus is always initiated by the host. They are
       just endpoints polled at regular interval by the host.

Table 10: Structure of a string descriptor

27.1.4.3.5 String Descriptors
The string descriptor gives user-readable information about the device. Usually,
this descriptor contains the name of the device, the manufacturer, the serial
number, or names for the various interfaces or configurations. If strings are not
used in a device, any string index field of the descriptors mentioned earlier must
be set to 00h. Strings are defined using Unicode UTF-16 encodings in little
endian and can support multiple languages with a language ID code. In a
Windows system, these stings can be seen in the device manager. Table 10 shows
the structure for a string descriptor.

27.1.4.4 USB Classes

So far, we talked about the way the communication is arranged between the host
and the USB device. We provided a lot of information about endpoints, virtual
channels where bytes are transferred, and the role that some of them play during
the configuration stage of a USB device. But what about the bytes transferred
during a regular transaction? For example, what about the way a mouse
communicates with the PC to signal its movement or the click of one of its
buttons?

USB specification demands this task to the USB classes, code information that is
used to identify a device’s functionality and to nominally load a device driver
based on that functionality. The information is contained in three bytes of the
device descriptor (bDeviceClass, bDeviceSubClass, bDeviceProtocol - see
Table 6).

There are two places on a USB device where class code information can be
placed. One is in the Device Descriptor, and the other is in the Interface
Descriptors. Some defined class codes are allowed to be used only in a Device
Descriptor, others can be used in both Device and Interface Descriptors, and
some can only be used in Interface Descriptors. The Table 11 shows the
currently defined set of standard class values, what the generic usage is, and
where that class can be used (either Device or Interface Descriptors, or both).
Table 11: USB classes standardized by the USB-IF

What advantages gives the usage of a USB standard class? The first advantage is
that a “standard” device can be used easily by the end-user. This fosters the
adoption of the device. For example, consider how it is easy nowadays to
connect a mouse or a keyboard to a PC. But the biggest advantage to using a
predefined USB device class is the cross-platform support across various
operating systems. All major operating systems include a driver in the OS for
many of the predefined USB classes that eliminates the need to create a custom
driver. And this removes one of the biggest obstacles in the USB adoption
especially for small companies and individual developers. To develop a custom
driver, especially for the Windows OS, is not a trivial task, that requires
adequate investments and time.
For this reason, it is quite common to find USB devices implementing the HID
class that are either no mice nor keyboards, and that exchange custom messages
between a specific application and the device through custom HID reports.
Table 12: Implementation of the USB peripheral
                                  in all STM32-series

27.2 STM32 USB Device Library
Chances are that you are a little bit mazed by all that information, especially if
this is the first time you deal with the USB specification. This is normal, and you
do not have to be worried too much. This for two reasons. First, the more you
will work with the USB the more you will master relevant topics. Second, you
do not have to implement the whole USB stack protocol from scratch.
To develop a complete USB stack it is not for the faint of heart. A lot of details
were omitted in the previous paragraphs. Moreover, without adequate
instrumentations (a USB protocol sniffer) it is unlikely that you can implement a
complete stack by yourself. As we will see later, to debug a USB communication
is impossible with regular debug tools because, in a USB transaction, things
happen too fast. Even a print on the UART can affect a communication session.

Luckily for us, ST already designed a complete USB device and host stack that
can be easily integrated in our firmware. However, not all STM32 families
provide a USB controller able to work both in device and host mode. Table 12
lists the implementation of the USB peripheral in all STM32-series. As you can
see, just some of them provides a USB On-The-Go (OTG) that allows to design
devices able to work both in host and device mode, and just few of them are able
to work in High Speed mode by using an external phyther. For the complete list
of the USB features in all STM32 families (including the suggested USB
hardware and PCB guidelines), refer to the AN4879.

ST also developed the support to the most widespread USB classes, and it is
relatively easy to adapt the code at your needs. In the next paragraph we will
study how to configure CubeMX so that it automatically generates for us all the
necessary code to add USB support in our firmware. Next, we will study the
architecture of the ST device stack. At the first instance, the generated code may
appear hard to understand, especially for the tight interconnection between the
USB device library and the CubeHAL. Finally, we will develop examples to
play with some of the standard USB classes. Let us go.

To add the ST USB Device library in an existing project is a straightforward
operation. You just have to follow this simple two-steps process. First, you have
to enable the USB peripheral in CubeMX (you can find it in the Connectivity
section of the Category pane). Next, you have to enable the USB Device
Middleware by selecting the wanted USB class as shown in Figure 11.

Figure 11: CubeMX options to configure
                            the STM32 USB Device Library

27.2.1 Understanding Generated Code

The Figure 12 shows the new project structure once that CubeMX generates the
code with the USB Device library and the wanted USB class130. At the same
time, the Figure 13 shows the whole application architecture: keep it on hands
while reading the rest of this paragraphs.
As you can see, three new files are added in the CubeHAL. Despite the different
name, all the three files are related to the configuration and the handling of the
USB data processing.

Figure 12: Structure of
                                the generated project

     stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c: this module corresponds to the Low-Layer USB
     Peripheral Control Driver (PCD). This module does not correspond to a
     real peripheral in the MCU. All operations carried out by the functions
     contained in the PCD module are all related to activities of the USB
     peripheral (mostly, IRQ management). As we will see next, all the
     operations performed on the USB peripheral (initialization, endpoint
     allocation, data transfer, class management, etc.) are carried out in the
     handler of the USB peripheral interrupt. This requires that it is important to
     keep track of the different states and transitions of the USB peripheral, so
     that the correct USB state machine is implemented. The PCD module is
     designed so that all events generated by the USB peripheral are routed to
     dedicated callbacks. These callbacks are “glued” with the main USB core
     library by the functions inside the USB_DEVICE/target/usbd_conf.c file.
Figure 13: Architecture of the generated
                         application with STM32 USB Device
                                        Library

    stm32XXxx_hal_pcd_ex.c: some more recent STM32 MCUs implement
    advanced USB features such as the handling of the Low-Power Mode
    (LPM) or a dedicated buffer memory called Packet Memory Address
    (PMA). This buffer memory is present in those STM32 MCUs with less
    SRAM memory so that the usage of PMA avoids allocating buffers in
    SRAM.
    stm32XXxx_ll_usb.c: this file contains the Cube Low-Level Library (Cube-
    LL) for the USB peripheral. As said several times before, the timing in USB
    communications is so stringent that it is important to have the most
    optimized code to avoid unwanted delays. For this reason, all routines
    related to the USB registers are designed to be optimized and dedicated to
    the actual peripheral in the given STM32 MCU.

CubeMX also adds two main folders to the project tree. The first one is
Middleware, which contains the STM32 USB Device library. This in turn is
organized in subfolders:

    Class/<class>: this folder contains all C source and header files related to
    the selected USB Class. For example, in Figure 12 you can see the file
    usbd_hid.c containing all the necessary code to handle the HID class.
    Core: this folder contains the main core USB stack, which is implemented
    in the following files:
usbd_core{.c,.h}: these files include the implementation of the USB
core state machine. The Table 13 shows the main functions
description.
usbd_ctlreq{.c,.h}: these files include variables and functions ensuring
the processing of all requests of the Chapter 9 in the USB 2.0
specification. The Table 14 shows the main functions description.
usbd_ioreq{.c,.h}: these files include the implementation of data
sending and reception on the endpoint 0. The Table 15 shows the main
functions description.
Table 13: API of the USB core stack
Function                 Description
                         Initializes the Device Handler and state
USBD_Init
                         machine
USBD_DeInit              De-initializes the Device Handler
                         Links the device structure handler to the
USBD_RegisterClass
                         class structure handler
USBD_Start               Starts the device core
USBD_Stop                Stops the device core and class
                         Initializes the device’s class with the
USBD_SetClassConfig
                         input configuration
USBD_ClrClassConfig      Clears a device’s class configuration
USBD_LL_SetupStage       Handles the setup stage requests
                         Handles the data reception from the
USBD_LL_DataOutStage
                         host on the convenient endpoint
                         Handles the data sending to the host on
USBD_LL_DataInStage
                         the convenient endpoint
USBD_LL_Reset            Reinitializes the Device’s handler
USBD_LL_SetSpeed         Sets the device’s speed
                         Modifies the device status into
USBD_LL_Suspend
                         suspended
                         Resumes the device old status before
USBD_LL_Resume
                         being suspended
                         Handles the Start Of Frame (SOF)
USBD_LL_SOF
                         event
                         Handles the Isochronous IN Incomplete
USBD_LL_IsoINIncomplete
                         event
                         Handles the Isochronous OUT
USBD_LL_IsoOUTIncomplete
                         Incomplete event
USBD_LL_DevConnected     Handles the Device connected event
USBD_LL_DevDisconnected Handles the Device disconnected event
Table 14: API to process the USB 2.0 Chapter 9 specification
   Function               Description
                          Handles all the requests that are
   USBD_StdDevReq
                          addressed to a USB device
                          Handles all the requests that are
   USBD_StdItfReq
                          addressed to an interface
                          Handles all the requests that are
   USBD_StdEPReq
                          addressed to an endpoint
                          Handles the different types of
   USBD_GetDescriptor
                          GET_DESCRIPTOR request
   USBD_SetAddress        Handles the SET_ADDRESS request
   USBD_GetConfig         Handles the GET_CONFIGURATION request
   USBD_SetConfig         Handles the GET_CONFIGURATION request
   USBD_GetStatus         Handles the GET_STATUS request
   USBD_SetFeature        Handles the SET_FEATURE request
   USBD_ClrFeature        Handles the CLEAR_FEATURE request
                          Organizes the received data buffer into
   USBD_ParseSetupRequest
                          setup request structure
   USBD_CtlError          Handles USB low level Error
   USBD_GetString         Converts Ascii string into Unicode one
   USBD_GetLen            Returns the string length

Table 15: API for data exchange over EP0
   Function                 Description
   USBD_CtlSendData         Starts data sending on the EP0
   USBD_CtlContinueSendData Sends the remaining data on the EP0
   USBD_CtlPrepareRx        Prepares the EP0 for receiving data
   USBD_CtlContinueRx       Continues the reception of data on EP0
   USBD_CtlSendStatus       Sends zero length packet on the EP0
   USBD_CtlReceiveStatus    Receives zero length packet on the EP0
   USBD_GetRxCount          Returns the received data length

The second folder added to the project by CubeMX is USB_DEVICE. This in
turn is organized in two subfolders.

    App: this folder contains the C file related to the initialization phase of the
    USB stack and the main device descriptor.
         usb_device{.c,.h}: these files contain the initialization sequence of the
         USB Stack. It contains just the MX_USB_DEVICE_Init() routine, which
         initializes the USB stack, registers the USB class and starts the USB
         peripheral.
         usbd_desc{.c,.h}: these files contain the USB device descriptors.
     Target: this folder contains just two C files.
         usbd_conf{.c,.h}: these files contain the “glue” code to link USB
         Device Core part to the actual STM32 device. The content of this
         folder plays the same role of the Board Support Packages (BSP) seen
         in other ST examples or projects. In this file you can find the effective
         implementation of all callbacks defined by the PCD module and the
         implementation of those USBD_LL routines related to the actual USB
         peripheral.

27.2.2 USB Initialization Sequence

To better understand the relation between the different source files seen before, it
is useful to get a look to the initialization sequence of the USB stack. While
reading the following text, keep on hands the sequence diagram on the next
page131.

1 - The first step of the sequence takes place inside the MX_USB_DEVICE_Init()
(usb_device.c file). Here the instance of the struct USBD_HandleTypeDef is
defined. The routine invokes in turn the following functions:

     USBD_Init() (usbd_core.c): this function checks whether all USB
     descriptors are ok, assigns the Device descriptors, sets the default state and
     passes the control to the USBD_LL_Init() function.
          USBD_LL_Init() (usbd_conf.c): this function takes care of the
          initialization of USB peripheral descriptors and the PMA memory if
          supported by the MCU. It then calls the HAL_PCD_Init() function.
                HAL_PCD_Init() (stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c): this function sets all
                the PCD related callbacks and configure the control endpoint
                EP0. It then passes the control to the USB_DevInit().
                      USB_DevInit() (stm32XXxx_ll_usb.c): this function
                      performs the effective configuration of the USB peripheral
                      by setting its registers.
2 - The control is back in the MX_USB_DEVICE_Init() (usb_device.c file). Now
the function invokes the USBD_RegisterClass() routine, which links the
instance of the struct USBD_ClassTypeDef - corresponding the USB class
selected - to the main USBD_HandleTypeDef instance. This will be used later by
the USB core stack to initialize the USB class accordingly.
3 - Finally, the MX_USB_DEVICE_Init() (usb_device.c file) routine invokes the
USBD_Start() routine:

     USBD_Start() (usbd_core.c): this function takes care of calling the Low-
     Level part of the stack to start the USB operations, by calling the
     USBD_LL_Start() routine.
         HAL_PCD_Start()(stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c): this function simply
         passes to control the function USB_DevConnect().
               USB_DevConnect()(stm32XXxx_ll_usb.c): this function enable
               the USB peripheral by enabling D+ Pull-UP bit to Connect
               internal resistor on USB D+ line

After these three main calls, the whole USB stack is ready to accept connections
by the host. It is now the good time to connect our device to the host PC. In all
nine Nucleo boards used in this text the USB signal are routed to the Morpho
connector, as shown in Figure 14. You can use the USB Type-B connector you
want. The wiring scheme shown assumes that the USB device is “self-powered”.
For this reason, we are not going to connect the VDD (+5V).

Owners of STM32F1/F3 MCU based boards need to take in account that the USB
phyther does not provide internal pull-up resistor for the D+ line, which is
mandatory in the USB 2.0 specification. So, it is required to add a 1.5k resistor
between PA12 and +3V3.
Figure 14: How to connect a USB Type-B
                             connector to a Nucleo board

27.2.3 USB Enumeration Sequence

I will never get tired of repeating this: USB protocol tends to appear hard to
master because all the operations involving its usage take place in an interrupt
handler. And this because of one simple reason: all operations performed on the
USB bus are always initiated by the master, which rules the bus, avoiding bus
conflicts by individual devices. This implies that the device needs to be ready to
process asynchronous events, to avoid that the application stalls waiting for USB
events.

So, what precisely happens when we connect the USB cable into the device
port? Well, the answer is not trivial, and it is mostly OS dependent.
Unfortunately, details change a lot between Windows, Mac and Linux, and to be
precise things can change a lot between the several releases of a given OS
(especially Windows). Finally, the USB Host controller of the PC may impact on
the enumeration.
However, the enumeration phase can be summarized in the next steps. Refer to
the USB sniffing sequence shown in Figure 15132 while reading the text.
Figure 15: Enumeration sequence of a VCP device
                              connected to a MacOS 11.x

1 - High-Speed (HS) devices begin the enumeration process as Full-Speed (FS)
devices. During the reset phase, HS devices and HS capable hubs begin a
negotiation process to determine if they can mutually move into the HS mode.
This process starts by asserting a voltage sequence on D+ and D- called
“chirping”. After this phase the device will end up in operating either in FS or
HS mode.
2 - The phyther inside the USB peripheral is now ready to exchange data with the
Host controller. The device needs to set its USB address and the Host starts the
setup sequence by issuing a SET_ADDRESS. The USB interrupt fires and the
HAL_PCD_IRQHandler() (stm32XXxx_it.c) is called. The handler detects that
the message is a SET_ADDRESS and calls the HAL_PCD_SetAddress()
(stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c) by passing the address ID received by the host. This
routine in turn calls the USB_SetDevAddress()(stm32XXxx_ll_usb.c) which
finally configures the USB interface.
3 - The address is now configured, and the Host asks for the device descriptors,
so that it can start understanding its capabilities. The Host starts a new setup
sequence by issuing a GET_DESCRIPTOR. The USB interrupt fires and the
HAL_PCD_IRQHandler() (stm32XXxx_it.c) is called. The handler detects that
the message is addressed to the control endpoint (EP0) and it passes the control
to the PCD_EP_ISR_Handler() routine.

     PCD_EP_ISR_Handler()(stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c): the routines
     immediately extracts the endpoint number (0) and decodes the service
     endpoint interrupt. This contains the ID for the SETUP transaction. The
     routine passes so the control to the HAL_PCD_SetupStageCallback()
     (usbd_conf.c) routine, which in turn calls the USBD_LL_SetupStage()
     routine.
USBD_LL_SetupStage()(usbd_core.c): the routine analyzes the
requests to detect the recipient of the request. The request is addressed
to the device, and so it passes the control to the USBD_StdDevReq()
routine.
      USBD_StdDevReq()(usbd_ctlreq.c): the routine analyzes the
      content of the request and it detects that the host is asking for the
      device descriptors. It so passes the control to the
      USBD_GetDescriptor()(usbd_ctlreq.c) routine, which in turns
      calls the USBD_FS_DeviceDescriptor()(usbd_desc.c) that
      passes the pointer to the device descriptor inside the usbd_desc.c
      file. The USBD_GetDescriptor() is so ready to transfer the
      device descriptor to the host. It calls the USBD_CtlSendData()
      routine.
            USBD_CtlSendData(usbd_ioreq.c): this routine configures
            the EP0 so that it can transfer the content of the array
            containing the descriptors. The control is so transferred to
            the USBD_LL_Transmit()(usbd_conf.c), which in turns call
            the HAL_PCD_EP_Transmit().
                 HAL_PCD_EP_Transmit()(stm32XXxx_hal_pcd.c):
                 this routine, after few setup instructions, passes the
                 control to the USB_EPStartXfer()
                 (stm32XXxx_ll_usb.c), which configure the EP0 (by
                 writing in the PMA memory, if supported) and then sets
                 the USB peripheral so that it starts the transfer (which
                 starts effectively once the host will ask for the data).
                 The Figure 16 shows the whole call graph.

Figure 16: Complete call-graph
                 generated upon a GET_DESCRIPTOR
                             request
4 - The Host uses the information in the device descriptors to learn about the
device and its abilities. This information includes the USB class and subclass,
VID/PID and index of the strings containing Manufacturer, Product and Serial
Number. The host so start asking for strings, by issuing several GET_DESCRIPTOR
commands asking for given string IDs.
5 - The host issues another GET_DESCRIPTOR command asking for the
configuration descriptor. This request not only returns the configuration
descriptor, but all other descriptors associated with it, such as the interface
descriptor and the endpoint descriptor. The configuration descriptors contain
relevant information such as the number of interfaces, device powering mode,
number and types of endpoint and so on.
6 - The Host to successfully use the device must load a device driver. The Host
searches for a driver to manage communication between itself and the device.
Windows uses its .inf files to locate a match for the devices Product ID and
Vendor ID. Device release version numbers can optionally be used. If Windows
cannot find a match, then it looks at the driver from a different perspective by
looking for a match with any class, subclass, and protocol retrieved from the
device. If a device was previously enumerated, Windows uses its registry to
search for the proper driver. When a driver is identified, the Host may request
additional descriptors that are specific to the device class or request that
descriptors are resent.
7 - After all descriptors are received, the Host sets a specific device
configuration using the SET_CONFIGURATION request. Most devices have only
one configuration. Devices that support multiple configurations can allow the
user or the driver to select the proper configuration. In this stage the firmware
needs to perform all the operations related to the communication between the
host and the device on the given interface’s endpoints, as we will see later in this
chapter.
8 - The device is now in the configured state. It took on its proprieties that were
defined with the descriptors. The defined maximum power can be drawn from
VBUS and the device is now ready for use in an application.
       The enumeration sequence described before is just a simplification of the actual process. Too many
       details are hard to be reported here and, as said before, things can slightly change depending on the
       very specific Operating System on the Host PC. I strongly suggest to start experiencing with the
       ST stack by using a dedicated USB sniffer, so that it is easier to understand which types of calls
       are coming from the host and which answers the stack is providing. For very simple USB projects,
       it is ok to start using the ST stack without worrying too much of the underlying details. But if you
       are going to do more complex works (for example, developing a custom class not covered by the
       stack), then you will mostly likely be ending in buying a dedicated tool.

27.2.4 The USB CDC Class

USB-IF standardizes several USB classes that represent really common devices
and applications. One of these classes is the USB Communication Device Class
(CDC)133.

USB Communication Device Class is a composite134 USB device class that
enables telecommunication devices like phones, ISDN terminal adapters,
networking devices like PSTN/ADSL modems, Ethernet adapters/hubs, etc., to
connect to a USB host machine. USB CDC specifies multiple models to support
different types of communication devices. The most relevant ones are:

    Direct Line Control Model
    Telephone Control Model
    CAPI Control Model
    Ethernet Networking Control Model
    ATM Networking Control Model
    Abstract Control Model

The Abstract Control Model (ACM) is defined to support legacy modem devices
and an advantage of ACM is the serial emulation feature (the so-called Virtual
COM Port - VCP). Serial emulation of a USB device eases the development of
host PC applications, provides software compatibility with RS-232 based legacy
devices, enables USB to RS-232 conversions and gives good abstraction over
the USB for application developers. Serial emulator USB ICs (like the FTDI
FT232 or the Prolific PL2303) are popular in the embedded industry. By
implementing the USB CDC class, we can provide our STM32 devices with a
USB serial converter, without adding dedicated peripherals. Finally, CDC class
is natively supported by Windows starting from Windows 10, without the need of
a dedicated driver.

The whole CDC class implementation is contained in just one file:
Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CDC/Src/usbd_cdc.c.
Instead, the functions which handle the VCP operations are implemented in the
USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_cdc_if.c file. In the next paragraphs we are going to
explain the CDC class implementation deeply. This will give us also the
possibility to explain how USB classes are handled inside the STM32 USB
Device Library.

Figure 17: Descriptors hierarchy in a VCP device

27.2.4.1 USB CDC Descriptors

Before going into details of CDC descriptors, it is best to do a quick recap.
In the previous paragraph we have seen that, during the enumeration phase, the
Host starts asking to the device for its configuration descriptors right after the
SET_ADDRESS operation. Each configuration defines a set of interfaces, each one
corresponding to a given class feature. To foster the compatibility among
different devices implementing the same USB class, every interface in each USB
class standardizes the number of communication endpoints and their
communication behavior (interrupt, bulk, control, isochronous).
Every USB CDC device implementing the Abstract Control Model shall provide
the descriptors shown in Figure 17. Let us describe them.

     Device Descriptor: this descriptor, which is implemented inside the
     USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_desc.c file, provides general information
     regarding device capabilities. Information such as implemented class and
     subclass, maximum packet size on the EP0, VID/PID, device release135 and
     other informative strings such as Manufacturer, Product and Serial strings.
     This last string is very important in VCP devices: the device serial will be
     used by Windows to prevent unwanted “COM-port proliferation.” A device
     with a serial number retains its COM-port number if moved to a different
     USB port on a Windows PC. A device that doesn’t contain a serial number
     gets a new port number on each attachment to a different port on a PC. In
     Linux and MacOS the serial number will be used to generate the
     corresponding /dev/ endpoint. For example, a USB device with a serial
     equal to 316E355B4236 will generate the endpoint
     /dev/tty.usbmodem316E355B4236.
     The following code shows the standard CDC device descriptor generated
     by CubeMX.
                         Filename: USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_desc.c
148 __ALIGN_BEGIN uint8_t USBD_FS_DeviceDesc[USB_LEN_DEV_DESC] __ALIGN_END = {
149   0x12,                       /*bLength */
150   USB_DESC_TYPE_DEVICE,       /*bDescriptorType*/
151   0x00,                       /*bcdUSB: BCD (2.00) */
152   0x02,
153   0x02,                       /*bDeviceClass: CDC*/
154   0x02,                       /*bDeviceSubClass: ACM*/
155   0x00,                       /*bDeviceProtocol: No class specific protocol */
156   USB_MAX_EP0_SIZE,           /*bMaxPacketSize*: EP0 size = 64 bytes/
157   LOBYTE(USBD_VID),           /*idVendor*/
158   HIBYTE(USBD_VID),           /*idVendor*/
159   LOBYTE(USBD_PID_FS),        /*idProduct*/
160   HIBYTE(USBD_PID_FS),        /*idProduct*/
161   0x00,                       /*bcdDevice rel. 2.00*/
162   0x02,
163   USBD_IDX_MFC_STR,           /*Index of manufacturer string in string
descriptor*/
164   USBD_IDX_PRODUCT_STR,       /*Index of product string in string descriptor */
165   USBD_IDX_SERIAL_STR,        /*Index of serial number string in string
descriptor*/
166   USBD_MAX_NUM_CONFIGURATION /*bNumConfigurations*/
167 };

     Configuration Descriptor: a typical CDC VCP device has just one
     configuration. The configuration descriptor specifies power requirements
     and the number of interfaces in the configuration. The configuration
     descriptor is defined inside the
     Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CDC/Src/usbd_c
     dc.c file.
      Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CDC/Src/usbd_cdc.c
269 __ALIGN_BEGIN uint8_t USBD_CDC_CfgFSDesc[USB_CDC_CONFIG_DESC_SIZ] __ALIGN_END = {
270   /* Configuration Descriptor */
271   0x09,   /* bLength: Configuration Descriptor size */
272   USB_DESC_TYPE_CONFIGURATION, /* bDescriptorType: Configuration */
273   USB_CDC_CONFIG_DESC_SIZ,      /* wTotalLength:no of returned bytes: 67 bytes */
274   0x00,
275   0x02,   /* bNumInterfaces: 2 interface */
276   0x01,   /* bConfigurationValue: Configuration value */
277   0x00,   /* iConfiguration: Index of string descriptor describing the
configuration */
278   0xC0,   /* bmAttributes: self powered */
279   0x32,   /* MaxPower 50 mA */

     Interface Descriptor: the USB CDC class defines two distinct interfaces
     for each configuration.
          The first interface (shown next) is called Communication Interface
          and it is used to describe the very specific capabilities of the
          communication device. Generic COM-port devices should specify the
          compatibility with the V.25ter protocol even if they don’t use AT
          commands. The communication interface has four class-specific
          descriptors plus an endpoint descriptor. The Header Functional
          descriptor specifies the version of the CDC specification (v1.1). The
          Abstract Control Model descriptor specifies what class-specific
          requests and notifications the device supports. The Union Functional
          descriptor identifies the interfaces that belong to the CDC function,
          which are typically the communication interface plus the data interface.
          The Call Management Functional descriptor tells how the device
          manages calls. Because a generic COM-port device has no calls to
          handle, the descriptor says the device doesn’t handle call management.
          An interrupt endpoint (OUT endpoint with address 0x82) sends status
          notifications to the host. The endpoint descriptor provides the
          endpoint’s number, direction, and maximum packet size (8 bytes). In
          the current implementation of the CDC VCP interface provided by ST
          this endpoint is not used at all, and usually no data transit over it with
          all major OSes.
      Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CDC/Src/usbd_cdc.c
283   /*Interface Descriptor */
284   0x09,   /* bLength: Interface Descriptor size */
285   USB_DESC_TYPE_INTERFACE, /* bDescriptorType: Interface */
286   /* Interface descriptor type */
287   0x00,   /* bInterfaceNumber: Id of the Interface */
288   0x00,   /* bAlternateSetting: Alternate setting */
289   0x01,   /* bNumEndpoints: One endpoints used */
290   0x02,   /* bInterfaceClass: Communication Interface Class */
291   0x02,   /* bInterfaceSubClass: Abstract Control Model */
292   0x01,   /* bInterfaceProtocol: Common AT commands */
293   0x00,   /* iInterface: */
294
295   /*Header Functional Descriptor*/
296   0x05,   /* bLength: Endpoint Descriptor size */
297   0x24,   /* bDescriptorType: CS_INTERFACE */
298   0x00,   /* bDescriptorSubtype: Header Func Desc */
299   0x10,   /* bcdCDC: spec release number */
300   0x01,
301
302   /*Call Management Functional Descriptor*/
303   0x05,   /* bFunctionLength */
304   0x24,   /* bDescriptorType: CS_INTERFACE */
305   0x01,   /* bDescriptorSubtype: Call Management Func Desc */
306   0x00,   /* bmCapabilities: D0+D1 */
307   0x01,   /* bDataInterface: 1 */
308
309   /*ACM Functional Descriptor*/
310   0x04,   /* bFunctionLength */
311   0x24,   /* bDescriptorType: CS_INTERFACE */
312   0x02,   /* bDescriptorSubtype: Abstract Control Management desc */
313   0x02,   /* bmCapabilities */
314
315   /*Union Functional Descriptor*/
316   0x05,   /* bFunctionLength */
317   0x24,   /* bDescriptorType: CS_INTERFACE */
318   0x06,   /* bDescriptorSubtype: Union func desc */
319   0x00,   /* bMasterInterface: Communication class interface */
320   0x01,   /* bSlaveInterface0: Data Class Interface */
321
322   /*Endpoint 2 Descriptor*/
323   0x07,                        /* bLength: Endpoint Descriptor size */
324   USB_DESC_TYPE_ENDPOINT,      /* bDescriptorType: Endpoint */
325   CDC_CMD_EP,                  /* bEndpointAddress */
326   0x03,                        /* bmAttributes: Interrupt */
327   LOBYTE(CDC_CMD_PACKET_SIZE), /* wMaxPacketSize: 8 bytes */
328   HIBYTE(CDC_CMD_PACKET_SIZE),
329   CDC_FS_BINTERVAL,            /* bInterval: 10ms*/

           The second interface is called Data Interface and it is responsible for
           sending and receiving the COM-port data. The interface descriptor
           (shown next) tells the host the interface has two bulk endpoints, one for
           each direction (0x1 is for Bulk OUT and 0x81 is Bulk IN). Each
           endpoint has an endpoint descriptor.
      Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CDC/Src/usbd_cdc.c
332   /*Data class interface descriptor*/
333   0x09,   /* bLength: Endpoint Descriptor size */
334   USB_DESC_TYPE_INTERFACE, /* bDescriptorType: */
335   0x01,   /* bInterfaceNumber: Id of the Interface */
336   0x00,   /* bAlternateSetting: Alternate setting */
337   0x02,   /* bNumEndpoints: Two endpoints used */
338   0x0A,   /* bInterfaceClass: CDC Data */
339   0x00,   /* bInterfaceSubClass: */
340   0x00,   /* bInterfaceProtocol: */
341   0x00,   /* iInterface: */
342
343   /*Endpoint OUT Descriptor*/
344   0x07,   /* bLength: Endpoint Descriptor size */
345   USB_DESC_TYPE_ENDPOINT,      /* bDescriptorType: Endpoint */
346   CDC_OUT_EP,                        /* bEndpointAddress */
347   0x02,                              /* bmAttributes: Bulk */
348   LOBYTE(CDC_DATA_FS_MAX_PACKET_SIZE), /* wMaxPacketSize: 64 for FS, 512 for
HS*/
349   HIBYTE(CDC_DATA_FS_MAX_PACKET_SIZE),
350   0x00,                              /* bInterval: ignore for Bulk transfer */
351
352   /*Endpoint IN Descriptor*/
353   0x07,   /* bLength: Endpoint Descriptor size */
354   USB_DESC_TYPE_ENDPOINT,      /* bDescriptorType: Endpoint */
355   CDC_IN_EP,                         /* bEndpointAddress */
356   0x02,                              /* bmAttributes: Bulk */
357   LOBYTE(CDC_DATA_FS_MAX_PACKET_SIZE), /* wMaxPacketSize: 64 for FS, 512 for HS
*/
358   HIBYTE(CDC_DATA_FS_MAX_PACKET_SIZE),
359   0x00                               /* bInterval: ignore for Bulk transfer */
360 } ;

27.2.4.2 USB CDC Class Initialization

Again, before going into additional details, let us do a quick recap.

  1. The device is connected to the host. After detecting the USB device speed
     mode (HS/FS), the host performs a SET_ADDRESS command by assigning a
     USB unique address on the bus.
  2. The host then asks to the device for its Device Descriptors by issuing one
     or more GET_DESCRIPTOR commands.
  3. The host asks in this stage - or in a later one - for string descriptors by
     issuing several GET_DESCRIPTOR commands.
  4. The host next asks for device’s Configuration Descriptors by issuing one
     or more GET_DESCRIPTOR commands. The device will provide the
     configuration descriptors and all Interface Descriptors implemented.
  5. The host so choose the wanted configuration and performs a
     SET_CONFIGURATION command.

Up to the step 5, all the messages between the host and the device are exchanged
on the EP0. You can clearly see this in Figure 15. So, the device needs to
configure the other endpoints (EP2 for control interrupt and EP1 for IN/OUT)
used by CDC drivers. This operation is performed by the USBD_CDC_Init()
(usbd_cdc.c) function, which is invoked during the SET_CONFIGURATION
command.

1 - The host issues a SET_CONFIGURATION command by passing 1 as the index of
the wanted configuration (remember that our device provides just one
configuration). The command is sent to the EP0 and so a new USB interrupt fires.
2 - The stack detects that the message is addressed on the EP0, the control
interrupt, and the HAL_PCD_SetupStageCallback() (usbd_conf.c) is called.
The control is then transferred to the USBD_LL_SetupStage() (usbd_core.c),
which detects that the call is a standard setup request and calls the
USBD_StdDevReq() routine.
3 - The USBD_StdDevReq()(usbd_ctlreq.c) detects that the command type is a
SET_CONFIGURATION and passes the control to the
USBD_SetConfig(usbd_ctlreq.c) routine. This in turn calls the
USBD_SetClassConfig()(usbd_core.c). This other routine simply calls the
initialization routine of the CDC class (USBD_CDC_Init()). If you give a look to
the source code, you will see that the code is designed to be abstracted from the
actual USB class used. This is possible thanks to the fact that the instance of the
struct USBD_ClassTypeDef (which corresponds to USBD_CDC (usbd_cdc.c))
is linked to the USB handler USBD_HandleTypeDef by the call to the
USBD_RegisterClass() inside the MX_USB_DEVICE_Init() (usb_device.c)
routine.
4 - The function USBD_CDC_Init()(usbd_cdc.c) is so invoked, and the EP1 and
EP2 are properly initialized. The routine also sets the USB peripheral so that the
EP1 is ready to accept data by the host by calling the
USBD_LL_PrepareReceive().
5 - Finally, the CDC Interface is initialized inside the USBD_CDC_Init() routine
by invoking the CDC_Init_FS()(usbd_cdc_if.c) routine, which simply
configures the global TX and RX buffers used to exchange data over the serial
interface.

27.2.4.3 USB CDC Class Operations
We are close to see a complete and practical example. But we need to understand
just few more things. Again, a recap may be gold in this phase.

Figure 18: Typical architecture of a USB-
                                     CDC application

The CDC is the standard USB class for the communication devices exchanging
data over a USB connection. The CDC is a generic specification, which defines
several communication models specific to the real device. The Abstract Control
Model is the model for serial interfaces, the so-called Virtual COM Port. The
STM32 USB Device library is designed so that the CDC implementation (which
is entirely contained in the usbd_cdc.c file) is abstract from the actual model
(called interface in the library). The file USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_cdc_if.c file
contains the implementation for the VCP model (see Figure 18).

This interface file contains just five routines:

     CDC_Init_FS: this function is called by the USB CDC class initializer
     during a SET_CONFIGURATION command (issued by the host).
     CDC_DeInit_FS: this function is called the USB CDC class de-initializer
     when the USB interface issues a reset operation (mostly because the USB
     device is disconnected from the host).
     CDC_Control_FS: this function handles all the specific CDC commands
     issued by the host driver or the application (in our case, a terminal emulator
     program connecting to the serial port). More about this function in a while.
     CDC_Receive_FS: this function is called by the USB stack once new data
     arrives on the endpoint EP1, that is once the data is exchanged over the
     serial port. Please, take note that you cannot use this routine in polling
     mode. This routine is a callback that will be called once the data is inside
     the RX buffer. Also take note that, once the data arrives on the EP1,
     CDC_Receive_FS() must call the USBD_CDC_ReceivePacket() routine
     that configures EP1 in receive mode again, so that it is ready to accept new
     data by the host.
     CDC_Transmit_FS: this function sets the transmit buffer and invokes the
     USBD_CDC_TransmitPacket that will configure the EP1 in transmit mode
     (remember that data will be “asked” by the host in an IN transaction).

Table 16: Structure of the CDC_SET_LINE_CODING request

By looking to the content of the CDC_Control_FS, you can see that it contains a
switch block to process the CDC-related Class Requests136 coming from the
host (and the application level). None of the case statements contains an
implementation. To proper establish a serial communication, it is mandatory to
implement at least the CDC_SET_LINE_CODING and CDC_GET_LINE_CODING
requests, which are used to configure the serial line communication parameters
(baud rate, stop bits, parity, data size). The serial protocol requires that, once a
CDC_SET_LINE_CODING is issued, the CDC_GET_LINE_CODING must return the
same configuration values. The configuration values received by the
CDC_SET_LINE_CODING request adhere to a well-defined structure, which is
shown in Table 16. The STM32 USB Device Library already defines the struct
USBD_CDC_LineCodingTypeDef used to store the configuration values.

The following code shows how to properly implement the line coding
configuration. Moreover, it shows a modification to the CDC_Receive_FS()
function (at line 239) so that every byte received on the serial port is echoed
back to the host: this will allows us to see what is written on the terminal
emulator. The complete source code is available in the book samples. Please
also consider that all those printf() will allow you to see debug messages on
the Nucleo VCP. This will clarify the way the VCP is configured.
                        Filename: USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_cdc_if.c
179 static int8_t CDC_Control_FS(uint8_t cmd, uint8_t* pbuf, uint16_t length) {
180   switch(cmd) {
181     case CDC_SEND_ENCAPSULATED_COMMAND:
182       printf("Received CDC_SEND_ENCAPSULATED_COMMAND: %d\r\n", length);
183       break;
184
185     case CDC_GET_ENCAPSULATED_RESPONSE:
186       printf("Received CDC_GET_ENCAPSULATED_RESPONSE\r\n");
187       break;
188
189     case CDC_SET_COMM_FEATURE:
190       printf("Received CDC_SET_COMM_FEATURE\r\n");
191       break;
192
193     case CDC_GET_COMM_FEATURE:
194       printf("Received CDC_GET_COMM_FEATURE\r\n");
195       break;
196
197     case CDC_CLEAR_COMM_FEATURE:
198       printf("Received CDC_CLEAR_COMM_FEATURE\r\n");
199       break;
200
201     case CDC_SET_LINE_CODING:
202       lineCoding.bitrate = (uint32_t) (pbuf[0] | (pbuf[1] << 8)
203                            | (pbuf[2] << 16) | (pbuf[3] << 24));
204       lineCoding.format = pbuf[4];
205       lineCoding.paritytype = pbuf[5];
206       lineCoding.datatype = pbuf[6];
207       printf("Received CDC_SET_LINE_CODING: \r\n\tBaudrate: %lu\r\n\tCharFormat:
%d\r\n\t
208               Parity: %d\r\n\tDataBits: %d\r\n", lineCoding.bitrate,
lineCoding.format,
209               lineCoding.paritytype, lineCoding.datatype);
210       break;
211
212     case CDC_GET_LINE_CODING:
213       printf("Received CDC_GET_LINE_CODING\r\n");
214       pbuf[0] = (uint8_t) (lineCoding.bitrate);
215       pbuf[1] = (uint8_t) (lineCoding.bitrate >> 8);
216       pbuf[2] = (uint8_t) (lineCoding.bitrate >> 16);
217       pbuf[3] = (uint8_t) (lineCoding.bitrate >> 24);
218       pbuf[4] = lineCoding.format;
219       pbuf[5] = lineCoding.paritytype;
220       pbuf[6] = lineCoding.datatype;
221       break;
222
223     case CDC_SET_CONTROL_LINE_STATE:
224       printf("Received CDC_SET_CONTROL_LINE_STATE: %d\r\n", length);
225       break;
226
227     case CDC_SEND_BREAK:
228       printf("Received CDC_SEND_BREAK\r\n");
229       break;
230
231     default:
232       break;
233   }
234   return (USBD_OK);
235 }
236
237 static int8_t CDC_Receive_FS(uint8_t* Buf, uint32_t *Len) {
238   CDC_Transmit_FS(Buf, *Len);
239   USBD_CDC_SetRxBuffer(&hUsbDeviceFS, &Buf[0]);
240   USBD_CDC_ReceivePacket(&hUsbDeviceFS);
241   return (USBD_OK);
242 }

When the CDC_SET_LINE_CODING request is issued? And, more important, what
is the calling sequence that generates the request? Again, the USB protocol
analyzer can help us in understanding what under the hood. The Figure 19 shows
the request originated by the terminal emulator program during the connection to
the COM port. As you can see, a SETUP transaction is issued over the EP0, with
a direction Host-to-Device (this is different from a typical SETUP transaction
during the enumeration phase, when the direction is Device-to-Host because the
device needs to send to the host its descriptors). The recipient of the transaction
is the interface (so, this is a Standard Interface Request) and the request is
addressed to the CDC class. The data contained in the transaction corresponds to
the CDC_SET_LINE_CODING request.
Figure 19: Transaction sequence originated by a CDC_SET_LINE_CODING
                                         request

27.3 Building Custom USB Devices
So far, we have seen that USB-IF standardizes several USB classes for given
families of devices. Mice, keyboards, external USB disks are just few examples
of standard and popular USB devices. However, chances are that, as
firmware/hardware developer, you are going to design a USB device that falls
outside the above categories. If this the case, you have to know that there are
several options available with pro and cons.

The main issue to take in account while designing a vendor-specific device is
that you need custom drivers for your device. And this is a relevant question
mostly for Windows OSes. To design a device driver using the Windows Driver
Kit (WDK) is not a trivial task. Moreover, you will need to sign the drivers with
a Code Signing Certificate (and this can cost up to USD 500) and go through the
WHQL certification (consider something between USD 2500 and USD 5000).
Not that easy and not that affordable even for some companies in terms of
complexity.
Depending on the degree of complexity and flexibility, these are the options to
consider when designing a new USB device.

     To use a standardized USB class: well, this is still the best option to
     prefer when designing a new device. All recent versions of the three major
     OSes (Windows, MacOS and Linux) provide standard drivers for the HID
     and the CDC classes. If your device is suitable to exchange messages by
     using a serial communication, then a Virtual COM Port (VCP) is a perfect
     solution. This is the main reason why USB to serial converters are still so
     popular in the electronics industry. The only relevant drawback in using the
     CDC class is the maximum transmission speed, which is limited to
     ~80KB/s in USB FS devices. The HID class is another good alternative,
     since even the oldest Windows releases provide support to this USB class.
     To design a WCID device: a Windows Compatible ID (WCID) device is a
     USB device that provides additional information to a Windows system, to
     facilitate automated driver installation. This extra information is simply
     exchanged with the host through custom string descriptors. WCID allows a
     device to be used by a Windows application almost as soon as it is plugged
     in, as opposed to the usual scenario where a USB device that is neither HID
     nor CDC requires end-users to perform a manual driver installation. WCID
     is an extension of the WinUSB Device functionality, introduced by Microsoft
     with Windows 8. The purpose of a WinUSB device is to enable Windows to
     load Winusb.sys as the device’s function driver without a custom INF file.
     For a WinUSB device, you are not required to distribute INF files for your
     device, making the driver installation process simple for end users.
     Conversely, if you need to provide a custom INF, you should not define your
     device as a WinUSB device and you should not specify the hardware ID of
     the device in the INF. Another advantage of this approach is that you do not
     need to undergo Windows Hardware Quality Labs (WHQL) testing for
     driver signing.
     To use libusb: libusb is an open-source project that provides generic
     access to USB devices. It is intended to be used by developers to facilitate
     the production of applications that communicate with USB hardware.
     libusb is a cross-platform library: it works under all Windows releases,
     Linux and MacOS. libusb also includes a Windows specific libusb-
     win32 library, which allows user-space applications to access USB
     devices on Windows OS. This library can be used as a default driver for
     your device, and you can install it in two ways: by using the Zadig tool by
     Pete Batard or the companion library libwdi (Windows Driver Installation
     library) by the same author. Pete also provides an excellent tutorial to build
     WCID devices and some examples for the STM32 USB Device library.
     Finally, consider that in MacOS and Linux the usage of libusb is all you
     need to interface a vendor-specific device.

Table 17 summarizes the main features of the four available options when
developing a new USB device. According to this author, unless speed is a strict
requirement for your application, to design a custom HID device is still the best
option. Moreover, for the STM32 families, ST provides a custom HID class that
can be easily customized at your needs. Let us analyze it.

Table 17: Comparison of the USB Device Class Driver features

27.3.1 The USB HID Class

The Human Interface Device (HID) is the USB class dedicated to peripherals
usually used by humans, such as keyboards, mice, gamepads and so on. However,
as we are going to see in a while, the HID specification is sufficiently generic so
that virtually every device can be implemented with this specification, until
transmission speed is not a strict requirement. The complete HID class
specification is available on the official USB-IF website. A HID device is
essentially made of one interface and two data endpoints (in addition to the
standard control endpoint EP0), even if several HID devices just implement the
IN data endpoint (for example, simple USB mice just send position information
through the data IN endpoint).

The HID protocol makes implementation of devices quite easy. Devices define
the structure of their data packets (called reports in the HID protocol
terminology) and then present a Report Descriptor to the host. The Report
descriptor is a hard coded array of bytes that describes the device’s data
packets, called Usage. This includes how many packets the device supports, the
size of the packets, and the purpose of each byte and bit in the packet, the
minimum and maximum value an individual byte or bit can assume. For example,
a mouse can tell the host that the left button’s pressed/released state is stored as
the 3rd bit in the first byte in data packet, and it can assume the logical values 0/1
to denote the button is released/pressed (note: these locations are only
illustrative and are device-specific). The device typically stores the Report
Descriptor in ROM and does not need to intrinsically understand or parse it.

Since the structure of the data packets can be shared between totally different
devices (and so, the meaning of the data generates different behaviors in the
host), the usage of individual groups of data is part of more generic Usage
Pages. Every Usage Page has a standardized Usage Page ID and individual
Usages have a standardized Usage ID in that Usage Page.
For example, the Usage Page Generic Desktop Page has a Usage Page ID
equal to 0x01, and the Usage ID 0x02 corresponds to the Mouse Usage, while
the Usage ID 0x06 corresponds to the Keyboard Usage. When thinking to Usage
Pages and Usages think them in term of namespaces: changing the Usage Page
affects what Usages are available. The USB-IF standardizes many Usage Pages
and related Usages. See the official documentation for more information.

This mechanism allows devices to be self-descriptive and in the same way
allows OSes to have just one driver for all HID devices: a powerful parser in
the OS driver allows to “understand” the structure of the messages sent by actual
devices, allowing manufacturers to build their new stylish and full-of-buttons
mice without the need of dedicated drivers.

However, I am sure that you are totally puzzled by all that stuff. This is normal
when dealing with USB and its standard classes. Don’t worry: things will
become clear soon.

27.3.1.1 USB HID Descriptors

Every USB HID device shall provide the descriptors shown in Figure 19. Let us
describe them.
Figure 20: Descriptors hierarchy in a USB HID device

Interface Descriptor: the HID class defines just one interface descriptor to
announce to the host the device implements the HID protocol.
The fields bInterfaceSubClass can assume the values 0=noboot and
1=boot: the value 1 indicates that the device adheres to the BOOT protocol.
Because the parser for the Report Descriptor (shown next) represents a
significant amount of code, a simpler method is needed to identify the
device protocol for devices requiring BIOS support (BOOT devices). HID
class devices use the bInterfaceSubClass field to indicate devices that
support a predefined protocol for either mouse devices or keyboards (that
is, the device can be used as a BOOT device). The boot protocol can be
extended to include additional data not recognized by the BIOS, or the
device may support a second preferred protocol for use by the HID class
driver.
The field nInterfaceProtocol can assume the values 0=none,
1=keyboard, 2=mouse. When this field assumes the values 1 or 2, the
Report Descriptor shall adhere to a well-defined structure.
Table 18: Structure of a USB HID descriptor

HID Descriptor: the HID descriptor provides information about the HID
class specification release and identifies the length and type of subordinate
descriptors for a device. The structure of the HID descriptor is shown in
Table 18.
The most relevant subordinate descriptor is the Report Descriptor. The
Report descriptor is unlike other descriptors in that it is not simply a table
of values. The length and content of a Report descriptor vary depending on
the number of data fields required for the device’s report or reports. The
Report Descriptor is made up of items that provide information about the
device. The content of the Report Descriptor will be used by the OS HID
device driver to establish data exchange with the HID device. A bad
formatted Report Descriptor will cause that no information flow between
the device and the host or it is misinterpreted. We are going to provide
additional information about Report Descriptor in the next paragraph.
The Physical Descriptor is a data structure that provides information about
the specific part or parts of the human body that are activating a control or
controls. For example, a physical descriptor might indicate that the right-
hand thumb is used to activate button 5. An application can use this
information to assign functionality to the controls of a device. Physical
Descriptors are entirely optional. They add complexity and offer very little
in return for most devices.
Interrupt Endpoints: a HID device communicates with the HID class
driver using either the Control (default) EP0 endpoint or two Interrupt
endpoints (called Data IN/OUT in Figure 20). The Control endpoint is used
for receiving and responding to requests for USB control and class data, for
transmitting data when polled by the HID class driver (using the
GET_REPORT request) and for receiving data from the host. The two
     Interrupt endpoints are used for receiving asynchronous (unrequested) data
     from the device and transmitting low latency data to the device. The
     Interrupt OUT endpoint is optional: if a device defines an Interrupt OUT
     endpoint, then output reports are transmitted by the host to the device
     through the Interrupt OUT endpoint. If no Interrupt OUT endpoint is
     declared then output reports are transmitted to a device through the Control
     EP0 endpoint, using SET_REPORT requests.

27.3.1.2 Overview of the Report Descriptor

When dealing with the HID protocol, the terminology itself can be a source of
confusion. In the HID protocol, data packets sent over Interrupt IN and OUT
endpoints are called reports. A report is a structured piece of information (for
example, the coordinate of the mouse pointer or a keyboard’s key) well
described by the Report Descriptor. The mechanism around the report descriptor
allows to have one generic driver in the host OS able to deal with a multitude of
devices, each one with its features and its way to send structured data. Clearly,
standard devices like keyboards and mice shall adhere to a fixed Usage and
Usage Pages, otherwise the OS will not be able to use them without a dedicated
driver137.

The Report Descriptor does not have a fixed structure. It is just a sequence of
bytes describing the structure of a report (a message). It is up to the specific
Usage and Usage Page to give a meaning.
Let us study a practical example. Here, we are building a mouse and we need to
describe the structure of the message. The following C struct does the job:
struct mouse_report_t {
    uint8_t buttons;
    int8_t x;
    int8_t y;
}

The x and y fields correspond to the movement of the mouse on the X and Y
axes. They are signed integers that take one byte, so their value goes between
-127 and +127 (well, to be precise the range goes between -128 and +127, but it
is ok to keep things simple). The buttons field contains information regarding
the three buttons of the mouse: just the first three nibbles in the byte are used. If
the bit is set to 1, then the button is pressed, otherwise it is released. Refer to
Table 19 for the complete interpretation of the message.
Table 19: The structure of the mouse’s message

How does that struct translate to a report descriptor? Well, the first step is to
describe the buttons, three of them:
1 USAGE_PAGE (Button)
2 USAGE_MINIMUM (Button 1)
3 USAGE_MAXIMUM (Button 3)

Each button status is represented by a bit, 0 or 1:
4 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
5 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (1)

There are three of these bits:
6 REPORT_COUNT (3)
7 REPORT_SIZE (1)

This variable data is an input to the computer:
8 INPUT (Data,Var,Abs)

What about the five useless padding bits? We need to declare them as constant
data:
 9 REPORT_COUNT (1)
10 REPORT_SIZE (5)
11 INPUT (Cnst,Var,Abs)

And this is the result:
 1 USAGE_PAGE (Button)
 2 USAGE_MINIMUM (Button 1)
 3 USAGE_MAXIMUM (Button 3)
 4 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
 5 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (1)
 6 REPORT_COUNT (3)
 7 REPORT_SIZE (1)
 8 INPUT (Data,Var,Abs)
 9 REPORT_COUNT (1)
10 REPORT_SIZE (5)
11 INPUT (Cnst,Var,Abs)
Now we have to define the X and Y axes movement:
1 USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
2 USAGE (X)
3 USAGE (Y)

We want it to be a signed integer that takes one byte, so it has a value between
-127 and +127:
4 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (-127)
5 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (127)
6 REPORT_SIZE (8)
7 REPORT_COUNT (1)

And send it to the computer as a variable relative coordinate:
8 INPUT (Data,Var,Rel)

And this is the result:
 1 USAGE_PAGE (Button)
 2 USAGE_MINIMUM (Button 1)
 3 USAGE_MAXIMUM (Button 3)
 4 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
 5 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (1)
 6 REPORT_COUNT (3)
 7 REPORT_SIZE (1)
 8 INPUT (Data,Var,Abs)
 9 REPORT_COUNT (1)
10 REPORT_SIZE (5)
11 INPUT (Cnst,Var,Abs)
12 USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
13 USAGE (X)
14 USAGE (Y)
15 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (-127)
16 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (127)
17 REPORT_SIZE (8)
18 REPORT_COUNT (2)
19 INPUT (Data,Var,Rel)

The above report descriptor is still not sufficient to make the OS to recognize the
mouse movement. The HID specification requires a well-defined preamble:
 1 USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
 2 USAGE (Mouse)
 3 COLLECTION (Application)
 4     USAGE (Pointer)
 5     COLLECTION (Physical)
 6         USAGE_PAGE (Button)
 7         USAGE_MINIMUM (Button 1)
 8         USAGE_MAXIMUM (Button 3)
 9         LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
10         LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (1)
11         REPORT_COUNT (3)
12         REPORT_SIZE (1)
13         INPUT (Data,Var,Abs)
14         REPORT_COUNT (1)
15         REPORT_SIZE (5)
16         INPUT (Cnst,Var,Abs)
17         USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
18         USAGE (X)
19         USAGE (Y)
20         LOGICAL_MINIMUM (-127)
21         LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (127)
22         REPORT_SIZE (8)
23         REPORT_COUNT (2)
24         INPUT (Data,Var,Rel)
25     END COLLECTION
26 END COLLECTION

Finally, the above report descriptor needs to be “compiled” so that it becomes a
const array to be stored in FLASH memory. This can be done by using a
dedicated tool provided by the USB-IF. And so, the descriptor becomes a C
array:
 1 const char ReportDescriptor[50] = {
 2     0x05, 0x01,                    // USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
 3     0x09, 0x02,                    // USAGE (Mouse)
 4     0xa1, 0x01,                    // COLLECTION (Application)
 5     0x09, 0x01,                    //   USAGE (Pointer)
 6     0xa1, 0x00,                    //   COLLECTION (Physical)
 7     0x05, 0x09,                    //     USAGE_PAGE (Button)
 8     0x19, 0x01,                    //     USAGE_MINIMUM (Button 1)
 9     0x29, 0x03,                    //     USAGE_MAXIMUM (Button 3)
10     0x15, 0x00,                    //     LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
11     0x25, 0x01,                    //     LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (1)
12     0x95, 0x03,                    //     REPORT_COUNT (3)
13     0x75, 0x01,                    //     REPORT_SIZE (1)
14     0x81, 0x02,                    //     INPUT (Data,Var,Abs)
15     0x95, 0x01,                    //     REPORT_COUNT (1)
16     0x75, 0x05,                    //     REPORT_SIZE (5)
17     0x81, 0x03,                    //     INPUT (Cnst,Var,Abs)
18     0x05, 0x01,                    //     USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
19     0x09, 0x30,                    //     USAGE (X)
20     0x09, 0x31,                    //     USAGE (Y)
21     0x15, 0x81,                    //     LOGICAL_MINIMUM (-127)
22     0x25, 0x7f,                    //     LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (127)
23     0x75, 0x08,                    //     REPORT_SIZE (8)
24     0x95, 0x02,                    //     REPORT_COUNT (2)
25     0x81, 0x06,                    //     INPUT (Data,Var,Rel)
26     0xc0,                          //   END_COLLECTION
27     0xc0                           // END_COLLECTION
28 };

Going into details of the above report description declarations is outside the
scope of this book. Moreover, I have to admit that this matter is mostly for
people operating in the HID industry, since it is very poorly documented, and it
is very tough to find good tutorials online. I suggest giving a look to this tutorial
and this other one for a good introduction to the topic.

27.3.1.3 USB HID Class-Specific Requests

The USB-IF standardizes very few class-specific requests for the HID class.
These requests are sent by the Host to the device through the control EP0, and
they are summarized in Table 20.

Table 20: HID class-specific requests
        Value Request      Description
                           The GET_REPORT request allows the
              GET_REPORT
        0x01 138           host to receive a report via the Control
                           pipe.
                           The GET_IDLE request reads the current
        0x02 GET_IDLE
                           idle rate for a particular Input report.
                           The GET_PROTOCOL request reads
              GET_PROTOCOL which protocol is currently active
        0x03 139
                           (either the boot protocol or the report
                           protocol.)
        0x04-
              Reserved
        0x08
                           The SET_REPORT request allows the
                           host to send a report to the device,
        0x09 SET_REPORT
                           possibly setting the state of input,
                           output, or feature controls.
                           The SET_IDLE request silences a
                           particular report on the Interrupt In
        0x0A SET_IDLE
                           pipe until a new event occurs or the
                           specified amount of time passes
                           The SET_PROTOCOL switches between
              SET_PROTOCOL
        0x0B 140           the boot protocol and the report
                           protocol (or vice versa).

27.3.2 Building a Vendor-Specific USB HID Device
Let us do a quick recap, this time focusing on shallow details without going too
much in depth.
A HID compliant device is a USB peripheral exchanging messages, called
reports, with the host PC. This is performed by using two Interrupt endpoints:
one IN endpoint for messages flowing from the device to the host and one OUT
endpoint (optional) for messages from the host to the device. In order to
exchange data between the two endpoints, this data needs to be exactly described
to the host device driver: how many bytes are exchanged, if this data varying or it
is constant, the value these bytes can assume and how they relate each other. This
operation is carried out by the Report descriptor, which shall adhere to a well-
defined structure.
If we just focus on the above sentences, then we can forget about mice,
keyboards, gamepads, human beings and so on. From the HID protocol point-of-
view, a HID device is just a peripheral sending bunch of bytes over the USB
communication. And we can build the custom protocol we want over this
sequence of bytes.

Having this simple concept in mind, we can build how many vendor-specific
devices we want, without dealing with the development and certification of
custom device drivers, custom installers for drivers and so on. This is the reason
why making vendor-specific HID devices is still the best option when designing
a new USB device, and this is the reason why ST provides a Custom HID class
in its STM32 USB Device Library.

As you can see, the most relevant issue to address when designing a vendor-
specific HID device is the definition of the Report Descriptor. Without a good
Report Descriptor we will not be able to exchange messages (reports) between
the host and the device. The good news is that the HID specification provides a
way to define “unstructured” reports, that do not need to adhere to a fixed
structure like mice and keyboards. For example, we can declare a report that can
assume the full range of 8-bit bytes:
4 LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
5 LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (255)

And then we can define the Input report (that is the message flowing from the
device to the host) as a sequence of n variable bytes:
6 REPORT_ID (1)
7 REPORT_SIZE (8)
8 REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the report)
 9 USAGE (Undefined)
10 INPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)

where the REPORT_ID corresponds to a tag we add to the message so that we can
specialize the reports according to given tags.
In the same way, we can define the Output report (that is the message flowing
from the host to the device):
11 REPORT_ID (2)
12 REPORT_SIZE (8)
13 REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the report)
14 USAGE (Undefined)
15 OUTPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)

Putting all together, we have the following Report Descriptor:
 1 USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
 2 USAGE (Undefined)
 3 COLLECTION (Application)
 4     LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
 5     LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (255)
 6     REPORT_ID (1)
 7     REPORT_SIZE (8)
 8     REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the report)
 9     USAGE (Undefined)
10     INPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
11     REPORT_ID (2)
12     REPORT_SIZE (8)
13     REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the report)
14     USAGE (Undefined)
15     OUTPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
16 END_COLLECTION

Which translates to the following C array:
 1 const uint8_t ReportDescriptor[32] = {
 2   0x05, 0x01,                    // USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
 3   0x09, 0x00,                    // USAGE (Undefined)
 4   0xa1, 0x01,                    // COLLECTION (Application)
 5   0x15, 0x00,                    //   LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
 6   0x26, 0xff, 0x00,              //   LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (255)
 7   // IN report
 8   0x85, 0x01,                    //   REPORT_ID (1) - The report tag
 9   0x75, 0x08,                    //   REPORT_SIZE (8)
10   0x95, IN_REPORT_SIZE-1,        //   REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the
report)
11   0x09, 0x00,                    //   USAGE (Undefined)
12   0x81, 0x82,                    //   INPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
13   // OUT report
14   0x85, 0x02,                    //   REPORT_ID (2) - The report tag
15   0x75, 0x08,                    //   REPORT_SIZE (8)
16   0x95, OUT_REPORT_SIZE-1,       //   REPORT_COUNT (The amount of bytes in the
report)
17   0x09, 0x00,                //   USAGE (Undefined)
18   0x91, 0x82,                //   OUTPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
19   0xc0                       // END_COLLECTION
20 };

Once we have defined the report descriptor, we can generate a new project by
using CubeMX and by selecting the Custom Human Interface Device Class
(HID) as wanted class for our device. CubeMX will generate a template project
that can be adapted to our needs with a few modifications. The Figure 21 shows
the structure of the generated project. Let us briefly describe the most relevant
source files and their main routines.

Figure 21: Structure
                                of the Custom HID
                                 generated project

     Class/CustomHID/Src/usbd_customhid.c: this file contains the complete
     implementation of the HID class protocol.
         The array USBD_CUSTOM_HID_CfgFSDesc contains the full
         implementation of the HID descriptors (Configuration, Interface, HID
         and Endpoint descriptors).
         The function USBD_CUSTOM_HID_Init() is responsible of the IN and
         OUT endpoints initialization.
         The function USBD_CUSTOM_HID_Setup() contains the full
         implementation of the Class-specific Requests list in Table 20.
         The function USBD_CUSTOM_HID_SendReport allows to send a report
         (a message) with a given LEN through the IN endpoint.
     USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_custom_hid_if.c: this file contains the actual
     implementation of the custom HID protocol.
         The array CUSTOM_HID_ReportDesc_FS contains the report
         descriptor, which will be passed to the host when the
         GET_DESCRIPTOR request is issued over the EP0.
         The function CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS() is a callback invoked once
         a report is sent by the host through the OUT endpoint.

We are now going to see a complete and very bare bone example that allows us
to understand which modifications are needed to the generated project so that we
can exchange reports in both the ways. The idea is to have a report message
made of four bytes:

     The first byte is the report ID. The report ID is used to “tag” the reports, and
     we have just two IDs: the ID 1 is used for messages from the device to the
     host (INPUT report); the ID 2 is for messages flowing in the opposite way.
     The second byte corresponds to the status of the Nucleo’s USER button (the
     blue one). The byte is used just for the IN report (with ID 1), since we
     cannot modify the status of a button.
     The third and fourth bytes correspond to the upper and lower part of an
     unsigned half-word (16 bits) used to setup the DAC output I/O connected to
     the Nucleo’s LD2 LED. This will allow us to modify the output voltage of
     the PA5 GPIO so that we can dimmer the LD2 LED.

Owners of the Nucleo-F401 and Nucleo-F103 will find a slightly different
example. Since those STM32 MCUs do not provide a DAC, the example is made
so that the LD2 LED blinks at 1Hz rate. For this reason, the third byte of the
report message will never change.

                     Filename: USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_custom_hid_if.c
24 /* Private variables ---------------------------------------------------------*/
25 extern DAC_HandleTypeDef hdac;
26 extern USBD_HandleTypeDef hUsbDeviceFS;
27
28 /** Usb HID report descriptor. */
29 static const uint8_t CUSTOM_HID_ReportDesc_FS[USBD_CUSTOM_HID_REPORT_DESC_SIZE] =
{
30   0x05, 0x01,                    // USAGE_PAGE (Generic Desktop)
31   0x09, 0x00,                    // USAGE (Undefined)
32   0xa1, 0x01,                    // COLLECTION (Application)
33   0x15, 0x00,                    //   LOGICAL_MINIMUM (0)
34   0x26, 0xff, 0x00,              //   LOGICAL_MAXIMUM (255)
35   // IN report
36   0x85, 0x01,                    //   REPORT_ID (1)
37   0x75, 0x08,                    //   REPORT_SIZE (8)
38   0x95, USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE-1,      // REPORT_COUNT (3)
39   0x09, 0x00,                    //   USAGE (Undefined)
40   0x81, 0x82,                    //   INPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
41   // OUT report
42   0x85, 0x02,                    //   REPORT_ID (2)
43   0x75, 0x08,                    //   REPORT_SIZE (8)
44   0x95, USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE-1,       // REPORT_COUNT (3)
45   0x09, 0x00,                    //   USAGE (Undefined)
46   0x91, 0x82,                    //   OUTPUT (Data,Var,Abs,Vol)
47   0xC0                           //   END_COLLECTION
48 };
49
50 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_Init_FS(void);
51 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_DeInit_FS(void);
52 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS(uint8_t *report, uint8_t report_len);
53 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_GetData(uint8_t *report, uint8_t *report_len);
54
55 USBD_CUSTOM_HID_ItfTypeDef USBD_CustomHID_fops_FS = {
56   CUSTOM_HID_ReportDesc_FS,
57   CUSTOM_HID_Init_FS,
58   CUSTOM_HID_DeInit_FS,
59   CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS,
60   CUSTOM_HID_GetData
61 };
62
63 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_Init_FS(void) {
64   return (USBD_OK);
65 }
66
67 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_DeInit_FS(void) {
68   return (USBD_OK);
69 }
70
71 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS(uint8_t *report, uint8_t report_len) {
72   HAL_DAC_SetValue(&hdac, DAC_CHANNEL_2, DAC_ALIGN_12B_R,
73                    (uint32_t)((report[2] << 8) | report[3]));
74
75   return (USBD_OK);
76 }
77
78 static int8_t CUSTOM_HID_GetData(uint8_t *report, uint8_t *report_len) {
79   uint32_t dacValue = 0;
80
81   report[0] = 0x1;
82   report[1] = !HAL_GPIO_ReadPin(B1_GPIO_Port, B1_Pin);
83
84   dacValue = HAL_DAC_GetValue(&hdac, DAC_CHANNEL_2);
85   report[2] = dacValue >> 8;
86   report[3] = dacValue & 0xFF;
87
88   *report_len = 4;
89
90   return (USBD_OK);
91 }

The above code shows the modifications to the usbd_customhid-if.c file. Lines
[29:48] correspond to the report descriptor described so far. At lines [55:61]
there is an instance of the struct USBD_CUSTOM_HID_ItfTypeDef (defined in
the file usbd_customhid.h), which has been modified to add the pointer to an
additional function to retrieve the report data: the function is implemented at
lines [78:91] and it is self-explanatory. Finally, the callback
CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS() is modified so that it sets the DAC channel 2 to
the value received by the host.

The auto-generated code assumes a dimension of the report message equal to two
and a smaller dimension of the report descriptor. We so need to modify the
macros USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE and
USBD_CUSTOM_HID_REPORT_DESC_SIZE in the usbd_conf.h file, as shown
below at lines [75:77]:
                         Filename: USB_DEVICE/App/usbd_conf.h
64 /*---------- -----------*/
65 #define USBD_MAX_NUM_INTERFACES     1
66 /*---------- -----------*/
67 #define USBD_MAX_NUM_CONFIGURATION     1
68 /*---------- -----------*/
69 #define USBD_MAX_STR_DESC_SIZ     512
70 /*---------- -----------*/
71 #define USBD_DEBUG_LEVEL     0
72 /*---------- -----------*/
73 #define USBD_SELF_POWERED     1
74 /*---------- -----------*/
75 #define USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE     4
76 /*---------- -----------*/
77 #define USBD_CUSTOM_HID_REPORT_DESC_SIZE     32
78 /*---------- -----------*/
79 #define CUSTOM_HID_FS_BINTERVAL     0x5

In the same way, we need to increase the dimension of the two endpoints’ buffer
(IN/OUT) in the file usbd_custom_hid.h:
Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CustomHID/Inc/usbd_customhid.h
44 #define CUSTOM_HID_EPIN_ADDR                         0x81U
45 #define CUSTOM_HID_EPIN_SIZE                         USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE
46
47 #define CUSTOM_HID_EPOUT_ADDR                        0x02U
48 #define CUSTOM_HID_EPOUT_SIZE                        USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE

        Read Carefully

        In the same header file we need to modify the OUT endpoint address from 0x1 to 0x2, as shown at
        line 47. This because the current HID class implementation does not take care of the concurrent
        access (in reading/writing) on the IN/OUT endpoints, and this could break the endpoint
        configuration causing the stall of the USB stack. So, the simplest workaround is to use two
        different endpoint numbers at all. This will cause a lot of headaches to novice users and this is very
        subtle to debug if you do not have an hardware USB protocol analyzer.

Finally, we need to perform a few modifications to the usbd_custom_hid.c.
First, we need to modify the USBD_CUSTOM_HID_Setup() function (which is
responsible of the processing of the Class Requests) so that it correctly handles
the GET_REPORT request. This request is not implemented by ST, while it is the
sole mandatory Class Request as shown in Table 20.
Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CustomHID/Src/usbd_customhid.c
431 static uint8_t USBD_CUSTOM_HID_Setup(USBD_HandleTypeDef *pdev,
432                                       USBD_SetupReqTypedef *req)
433 {
434   USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef *hhid = (USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef *)pdev-
>pClassData;
435   uint16_t len = 0U;
436   uint8_t *pbuf = NULL;
437   uint16_t status_info = 0U;
438   uint8_t ret = USBD_OK;
439   uint8_t report[USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE];
440   uint8_t reportLen = 0;
441
442   switch (req->bmRequest & USB_REQ_TYPE_MASK)
443   {
444     case USB_REQ_TYPE_CLASS :
445       switch (req->bRequest)
446       {
447         case CUSTOM_HID_REQ_SET_PROTOCOL:
448           hhid->Protocol = (uint8_t)(req->wValue);
449           break;
450
451         case CUSTOM_HID_REQ_GET_PROTOCOL:
452           USBD_CtlSendData(pdev, (uint8_t *)(void *)&hhid->Protocol, 1U);
453           break;
454
455         case CUSTOM_HID_REQ_SET_IDLE:
456           hhid->IdleState = (uint8_t)(req->wValue >> 8);
457           break;
458
459         case CUSTOM_HID_REQ_GET_IDLE:
460           USBD_CtlSendData(pdev, (uint8_t *)(void *)&hhid->IdleState, 1U);
461           break;
462
463         case CUSTOM_HID_REQ_GET_REPORT:
464           ((USBD_CUSTOM_HID_ItfTypeDef *)pdev->pUserData)->GetData(report,
&reportLen);
465           if(reportLen == USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE) {
466               USBD_CtlSendData(pdev, report, reportLen);
467               ret = USBD_OK;
468           } else {
469               USBD_CtlError(pdev, req);
470               ret = USBD_FAIL;
471           }
472           break;

Next, we need to modify the functions USBD_CUSTOM_HID_DataOut() and
USBD_CUSTOM_HID_EP0_RxReady() so that we can pass to the
CUSTOM_HID_OutEvent_FS() a report message with a length higher than two.
Filename: Middlewares/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Class/CustomHID/Src/usbd_customhid.c
649 static uint8_t USBD_CUSTOM_HID_DataOut(USBD_HandleTypeDef *pdev, uint8_t epnum)
{
650   USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef *hhid = (USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef *)pdev-
>pClassData;
651
652   ((USBD_CUSTOM_HID_ItfTypeDef *)pdev->pUserData)->OutEvent(
653                                  hhid->Report_buf,
USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE);
654
655   USBD_LL_PrepareReceive(pdev, CUSTOM_HID_EPOUT_ADDR, hhid->Report_buf,
656                          USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE);
657
658   return USBD_OK;
659 }
660
661 static uint8_t USBD_CUSTOM_HID_EP0_RxReady(USBD_HandleTypeDef *pdev) {
662   USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef     *hhid = (USBD_CUSTOM_HID_HandleTypeDef
*)pdev->pClassData;
663
664   if (hhid->IsReportAvailable == 1U) {
665       ((USBD_CUSTOM_HID_ItfTypeDef *)pdev->pUserData)->OutEvent(
666                                  hhid->Report_buf,
USBD_CUSTOMHID_OUTREPORT_BUF_SIZE);
667
668     hhid->IsReportAvailable = 0U;
669   }
670
671   return USBD_OK;
672 }
The example is fully working but with just one notably limitation: the only way to
transfer data from the device to the host is by issuing a GET_REPORT request. This
is a strong limitation that does not allow us to capture once the USER BUTTON
is pressed. We can so modify the example so that a report message is sent to the
host once the interrupt connected to GPIO13 fires.
                         Filename: USB_DEVICE/App/usb_device.c
22 #include "usb_device.h"
23 #include "usbd_core.h"
24 #include "usbd_desc.h"
25 #include "usbd_customhid.h"
26 #include "usbd_custom_hid_if.h"
27
28 /* Private variables ---------------------------------------------------------*/
29 volatile int8_t userBtnStatus = -1;
30
31 /* USB Device Core handle declaration. */
32 USBD_HandleTypeDef hUsbDeviceFS;
33
34 void MX_USB_DEVICE_Init(void) {
35   uint8_t report[4], reportLen;
36
37   /* Init Device Library, add supported class and start the library. */
38   if (USBD_Init(&hUsbDeviceFS, &FS_Desc, DEVICE_FS) != USBD_OK) {
39     Error_Handler();
40   }
41   if (USBD_RegisterClass(&hUsbDeviceFS, &USBD_CUSTOM_HID) != USBD_OK) {
42     Error_Handler();
43   }
44   if (USBD_CUSTOM_HID_RegisterInterface(&hUsbDeviceFS, &USBD_CustomHID_fops_FS) !=
USBD_OK) {
45     Error_Handler();
46   }
47   if (USBD_Start(&hUsbDeviceFS) != USBD_OK) {
48     Error_Handler();
49   }
50
51   while(1) {
52     if(userBtnStatus >= 0) {
53       HAL_Delay(10); //Adding a little bit of debouncing
54       if(HAL_GPIO_ReadPin(B1_GPIO_Port, B1_Pin) == userBtnStatus) {
55         USBD_CustomHID_fops_FS.GetData(report, &reportLen);
56         USBD_CUSTOM_HID_SendReport(&hUsbDeviceFS, report, reportLen);
57       }
58       userBtnStatus = -1;
59     }
60   }
61 }
62
63 void HAL_GPIO_EXTI_Callback(uint16_t GPIO_Pin) {
64   if(GPIO_Pin == B1_Pin) {
65     userBtnStatus = HAL_GPIO_ReadPin(B1_GPIO_Port, B1_Pin);
66   }
67 }
How to test the example? Well, we have several options depending on the HOST
Operating System.

    Windows: if you just want to perform a test of the sample firmware, then
    you can consider the SimpleHIDWrite tool by Jan Axelson. This tool works
    very easily. First, you need to select the device you want to exchange data
    with. The tool will automatically show as much text boxes as many bytes
    are in the report message. In our case, it will show one byte for the Report
    ID and three bytes for the rest of the message (see Figure 22).
    By setting 01 as the Report ID, the tool will allow to retrieve the report
    message by clicking on Get Report button (the tool, will send a
    GET_REPORT request through the control EP0). The received message will
    have the form **rd** 01 00 00 00. Instead, if we press the USER
    BUTTON, then the tool will automatically display the report in the form
    **RD** 01 01 00 00. To set the DAC output we can setup the Report ID
    to 02 and the last two bytes to 0A 00.

Figure 22: The SimpleHIDWrite
                                       utility

    Windows, MacOS and Linux: if you need to programmatically access to a
    HID device, then the hidapi is one of the best option to consider,
    especially if you are making a cross-platform application. hidapi is a
    library part of the libusb project and it is dedicated to the handling of
    USB-HID devices. It works on the three major OSes offering the same API.
    Moreover, there exist several portings of the hidapi library to other
    languages.
     For example, the following snippet is written in Python 3 and it uses the
     cython-hidapi wrapper to interface our HID example.
                                 Filename: hid_test.py
 1 import hid, time, threading, struct
 2
 3 class myT(threading.Thread):
 4     def run(self):
 5         global hidhandle
 6         while True:
 7             report = hidhandle.read(0x4)
 8             if report[1] == 1:
 9                 print("USER BUTTON PRESSED")
10             elif report[1] == 0:
11                 print("USER BUTTON RELEASED")
12
13 hidhandle = hid.device()
14 hidhandle.open(0x483, 0x5750)
15
16 print("Manufacturer: %s" % hidhandle.get_manufacturer_string())
17 print("Product: %s" % hidhandle.get_product_string())
18 print("Serial No: %s" % hidhandle.get_serial_number_string())
19
20 t = myT()
21 t.start()
22
23 STEP = 50
24 ledStatus = 2000
25 incr = STEP
26 while True:
27     p = tuple(struct.pack(">H", ledStatus))
28     hidhandle.write((2,0)+p)
29     if ledStatus >= 3500:
30         incr = -STEP;
31     elif ledStatus <= 2000:
32         incr = STEP
33     ledStatus += incr
34     time.sleep(0.05)

The code should be easy to understand. The class myT is a thread running in
background that performs a blocking read() to the device: once the Nucleo’s
USER BUTTON is pressed, a new report is issued through the IN endpoint. If the
second byte in the report is equal to 1, then the USER BUTTON has been
pressed, otherwise it has been released.
The other part of the example is just a continuous writing to the OUT endpoint of
an unsigned integer ranging from 2000 up to 3500, and vice versa: this will cause
the LD2 LED to fade IN and OUT.

Finally, another solution to test a HID device is to use the hidapitester tool.
27.4 Debugging USB Devices
To develop USB devices is not a trivial task and, especially if you are new to the
USB protocol, you will need a way to debug the data exchanged between the
device and the host. There are two main options to perform this dirty job:
hardware protocol sniffer and analyzers and software tools.

27.4.1 Software Sniffers and Analyzers

There are several free and commercial USB software sniffers around. Software
analyzers can be used to capture device data transfers and protocols. They can
also be used to send commands to the device. Software analyzers work by
replacing the USB software stack on the host machine. This is a required step to
monitor the USB traffic. As a result, the software analyzer will be dependent on
the host hardware with regard to what information is available to be presented.
Software analyzers have one important advantage: they display communications
at the driver level, allowing to understand what’s going wrong between your
device and the host OS’s device driver.
However, software analyzers have also some disadvantages. First, a host cannot
monitor the USB traffic without being part of the bus itself. This means observing
conditions such as suspend or reset is not possible. Additionally, depending on
the host hardware and software stack, there are other bus conditions that the host-
controller handles without software involvement. Another con is the cross-
platform availability of the software. If the software analyzer runs just on
Windows, then you will be able to debug just the communication with Windows
OS. And this is a serious limit nowadays. One final disadvantage is related to
timing. The accuracy of timing with a software analyzer is dependent on the host
operating system, which could induce varying levels of inaccuracies.

You will find several USB software sniffers. Wireshark is the only one available
for Windows, MacOS and Linux. It is completely free, and it works well in most
situations.
However, if you are new to the USB protocol, you can find the Wireshark output
a little hard to decode. Several commercial and dedicated software are
available. USB Monitor (successfully used by this author in the past) and
USBTrace are two good alternatives to consider.

27.4.2 USB Hardware Analyzers
If you need to do serious things you need serious tools. Trust this author: buy a
hardware protocol analyzer and you will save a lot of time.
Hardware protocol analyzers are custom-manufactured pieces of hardware
(mainly an FPGA with a USB capable MCU) that are inserted between the host
and the device to monitor the bus traffic. Some of these devices even have the
capability to generate bus traffic if there is a specific condition that is trying to
be produced. Prices for these types of devices can vary greatly depending on
manufacturer, desired USB specification (USB 2.0 versus USB 3.0), and traffic
generation capabilities. In general, these analyzers cost between few hundred
dollars and several thousand dollars.

While there are several companies that produce hardware analyzers, the two
more common companies are TotalPhase and LeCroy. This author uses the
Beagle USB 480 from TotalPhase (see Figure 23), which comes with a free of
use software, called TotalPhase Data Center, which allows to analyze the traffic
between the host and the device. The software runs on Windows, MacOS and
Linux.

Figure 23: Beagle USB 480
                             protocol analyzer by TotalPhase

27.5 Optimizing the STM32 USB Device Library
Let us face it clearly: the STM32 USB Device Library is far from being an
optimized library. And this for one simple reason: ST designed the most possible
generic USB library, abstracting from the very specific STM32 MCU, the given
USB phyther (LS-FS/HS) and the USB class. Moreover, it is designed so that
everyone can design his own class by simply adapting existing code. However,
this makes the library full of replicated structures and full of if-then-else. The
result is a library with a relevant FLASH and SRAM footprint that can give you
a lot of issues when designing your application.
You can reach better results without upsetting the structure of the library by
performing these simple operations:

      If you are going to design a device that operates just in Full-Speed or High-
      Speed mode, then you can remove from the library all those descriptors
      related to the USB speeds you are not considering. For example, if your
      device operates just in FS mode, then you can remove the following giant
      arrays at all:
           USBD_<CLASS>_CfgHSDesc.
           USBD_<CLASS>_OtherSpeedCfgDesc.
      The other descriptors can be defined as const, so that they go in FLASH
      memory instead of SRAM. This will save a lot of SRAM memory. While
      doing this operation, comment the following lines in the file usbd_ctlreq.c,
      around at lines 436 and 441 (honestly speaking, I do not know what those
      lines are used for…):
        Filename: Middleware/ST/STM32_USB_Device_Library/Core/Src/usbd_ctlreq.c
428     case USB_DESC_TYPE_DEVICE:
429       pbuf = pdev->pDesc->GetDeviceDescriptor(pdev->dev_speed, &len);
430       break;
431
432     case USB_DESC_TYPE_CONFIGURATION:
433       if (pdev->dev_speed == USBD_SPEED_HIGH)
434       {
435         pbuf = pdev->pClass->GetHSConfigDescriptor(&len);
436         pbuf[1] = USB_DESC_TYPE_CONFIGURATION;
437       }
438       else
439       {
440         pbuf = pdev->pClass->GetFSConfigDescriptor(&len);
441         pbuf[1] = USB_DESC_TYPE_CONFIGURATION;
442       }
443       break;

      In the same way, you can remove all those functions designed to work just
      with one speed mode, and you can strip all those if-then-else related to
      USB speed selection. For example:
if(speed == USBD_SPEED_HIGH) {
    USBD_GetString((uint8_t *)USBD_CONFIGURATION_STRING_FS, USBD_StrDesc, length);
} else {
    USBD_GetString((uint8_t *)USBD_CONFIGURATION_STRING_FS, USBD_StrDesc, length);
}
return USBD_StrDesc;

this if can be simplified to just one instruction if your device operates just in FS
mode, for example.
Finally, consider that there exist other complete USB stacks that are more
optimized (and even more supported) than the ST’s library. tinyusb is a
framework to seriously take in account when designing USB devices and
consider that all STM32 families are officially supported.

27.6 Going to the Market
Before start selling a USB device, there are several steps needed depending on
the level of compliance you want/need to acquire.

First, there are some mandatory steps you need to do. The most relevant (and
expensive) one is the acquiring of an official Vendor ID (VID). The VID is a
unique identifier that each company gets from the USB Implementers Forum.
There are three options to get a VID:

     Become a member of USB-IF and pay the annual membership dues. At the
     time of writing this chapter, the dues were $5000/yr. Membership has
     several benefits. Some of the most important include
           A free Vendor ID (if one has not been previously assigned)
           Eligibility to participate in free USB-IF sponsored quarterly
           Compliance Workshops
           Opportunities to participate in USB-IF marketing programs and events,
           such as retail newsletters, store endcaps, featured products, etc.
           A company listing in the USB key contacts list
           Eligibility for inclusion in the USB current products list on the usb.org
           web site and in periodic USB-IF retail newsletters
           A waived logo administration fee when joining the USB-IF logo
           program
           Discounts on Developer Conferences, products in the e-store, etc
           Eligibility to participate in Device Working Groups
     Purchase a Vendor ID from USB-IF for a one-time fee of $6000. Note
     however that simply buying a VID does not authorize you to use the USB
     logo with a product. In order to do so, you need to become a USB-IF non-
     member logo licensee. This licensing fee comes at a cost of $3,500 for a
     two-years term. Also, be aware that this licensing fee does not entitle you to
     other USB-IF membership benefits, such as compliance workshops.
     Buy an individual PID from MCS Electronics. Well, this looks more like an
     Italian141 way of getting around the obstacle, but MCS Electronics is a
     Dutch company that acquired many years ago a VID and started selling
     individual PIDs from their large pool. They had a dispute with USB-IF, but
     it looks like that according to the Dutch law they can do that and USB-IF
     stopped to fight against them. So, if you need the USB Logo compliance
     (more about this next), then you need to buy your own VID and to invest
     ~10K USD. If, instead, you need just a unique VID/PID pair, it is ok to buy
     an individual PID from MCS for less than USD 20 (Yes, you read that
     right).

The next mandatory step is to perform compliance tests at least for European CE
and for the USA FCC. With these two certifications you can sell your device in
the majority of countries on the earth. When choosing a test lab, you have two
main options:

     Use a more expensive test-lab, but close to you.
     Use a far but a lot cheaper test-lab in China.

Consider that you can obtain a CE/FCC certification in China for less than USD
500. In China there are several companies notified for regulatory tests that work
fast and well in many circumstances. I personally visited a couple of relevant test
labs in ShenZhen and I can guarantee that you can find the same quality and
professionalism offered by several “well-known” western companies.
When testing your device, I suggest you to perform at least the following tests:

     Tests for the Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) Directive 2014/30/EU.
     Tests for FCC Title 47 CFR Part 15.
     Tests for the Low-Voltage directive (LVD) (2014/35/EU).
     Tests for the REACH-SVCH.

All those tests will cost you less than USD 1000 in a Chinese test-lab.
If you are going to design a 5V USB device, then the LVD test is not mandatory.
However, to obtain this certification, together with the REACH-SVCH one, will
save you a lot of headaches when shipping your devices around the world:
people from the customs can transform every happy deal in a nightmare. Trust
this author.
Figure 24: One of the USB-IF Logos - Can you spot which one you
                                         need?

Now there are a couple of additional and optional certifications you may need.
In case you want/need to acquire the USB Logo compliance (see Figure 24), then
you need to follow a dedicated path. To ensure the interoperability between
USB-based devices (hosts, device, hubs, etc.) the USB-IF strictly rules the way
your device adhere to the standards. So, you cannot use any USB logo on your
device freely. Instead, you must undergo a series of compliance tests that are
administered by USB-IF. These compliance tests will ensure that the device
under test confirms to any relevant sections of the USB specification. Upon
passing, the product will receive the ability to use the relevant USB―Certified®
logo, and in addition, have the product put on the USB integrators’ list, which is
simply a list maintained by USB-IF that contains the list of USB products that
have met the mandatory compliance criteria. There are two components that must
be completed on the path to being certified as USB compliant: checklists and
compliance testing. For more information, refer to the dedicated page on the
USB-IF website. When following this path, consider that this will cost to you no
less than USD 10K and it is strongly suggested to receive support from
specialized consultants.

Finally, you may need to acquire the Windows Hardware Quality Labs (WHQL)
certification for your device and drivers. Well, this is not a trivial step.
Microsoft offers a dedicated certification program, together with a suite of
dedicated tools to perform “pre-compliance” tests. Again, my suggestion is to
ask for help to an experienced test lab. Be prepared to invest a lot of money.
