28. Getting Started with a New Design
If you use STM32 microcontrollers for work, or you are going to create your
latest funny project as a hobbyist, soon or later you will need to leave a
development kit like the Nucleo, and you have to design a custom board around a
given STM32 MCU. For every hardware engineer this is always an exciting
process. You start from an idea, or a list of requirements, and you will obtain a
piece of hardware able to do magic things.

The development process of a new board can be divided in two main steps: the
hardware design part, related to components selection and placement, and the
software development part, that consists in a starting configuration and all the
code needed to make the board working. This chapter aims to provide a brief
introduction to this topic. The chapter is logically divided in two parts: one
related to the hardware design and one to software. Even if you are one of those
lucky people working in companies where the hardware engineer is a separated
figure from the firmware developer, it is strongly suggested to have a look at this
chapter, which is essentially based on the hardware design. Otherwise, if you are
the classical one-man band142, reading this chapter at least once could help you
if you are totally new to the STM32 world.

28.1 Hardware Design
If you come from simpler microcontroller architectures, like the ATMEL AVR
ATMega328p used for the Arduino UNO, you may be familiar with some
“artistic things” that often appear on the web (Figure 28.1 is an example143). A
lot of projects arise from a breadboard, few passives and several tons of wires.
And they work great too.

However, if you are going to make a new board with an STM32 MCU, you have
to completely forget this kind of design. This is because not only do not exist
STM32 microcontrollers provided in a THT package. These MCUs require that
special attention must be placed to the PCB layout process, even for the low-cost
line STM32F030. The PCB design become critical if you are planning to use the
fastest STM32 MCUs, like the F4 and F7 series, in conjunction with external
devices like fast QSPI memories and external SDRAM.
Figure 28.1: A creative “thing” made
                        with an ATMega328 plus 1 mile of wires

For each STM32 family, ST provides a dedicated datasheet named “Getting
started with STM32xx hardware development”. For example, for the STM32F4
family, the AN4488 is the corresponding document. It is strongly suggested to
carefully read these documents, since they contain the most important information
to design a new PCB correctly. For all my designs based on these MCUs, I have
always followed the information provided by ST engineers, and I have never had
any issues. The next paragraphs summarize the most important aspects and
decision steps, according to me, to follow during the design process of a new
board based on an STM32 MCU.

28.1.1 PCB Layer Stack-Up

Every time you start a new design based on a microcontroller, you need to decide
which PCB technology best fits your design and BOM cost, keeping in mind this
important axiom: the faster your board goes, the more PCB layers are required.
And this also true for STM32 MCUs. Even if it is not rare to see some low-cost
8-bit MCUs soldered on a single layer CEM PCB144, for an STM32 MCU a 2-
layers board is the minimum requirement. But, if you are planning to use the
fastest versions of the STM32F4 series (like the STM32F446 MCU able to run
up to 180MHz) or the latest STM32H7 series, then you have to consider a 4-
layers PCB as minimum requirement145.

Multi-layers PCBs have several advantages compared to 2-layers ones:

     More layers simplify the routing process, and this is really important if you
     have space constraints or if you need to route differential pair nets.
     They allow better routing for power as well as ground connections; if the
     power is also on a plane, it is available to all points in the circuit simply by
     adding vias.
     They provide an intrinsic distributed capacitance between the power and
     ground planes, reducing high-frequency noise especially if your board relies
     on an external SRAM or a fast flash.
     For the same reason as before, they allow to significantly reduce EMI/RFI
     emissions, simplifying the development cost and the CE/FCC certification
     phase.

However, 4-layers PCBs have a higher cost compared to 2-layers ones, and this
cost is often not affordable for some low-cost and higher volumes productions.
Moreover, it is right to say that the Cortex-M portfolio (and hence the STM32
one) ranges from “low-cost” solutions able to run correctly on 2-layers boards to
more powerful MCUs close to general purpose microprocessors (like the
Cortex-M7 series), which demand a more advanced PCB stackup.

My personal experience is based on PCB designed with STM32F030 and
STM32F401 MCUs, both implemented with 2-layers PCBs, and I had not
significant issues during the boards testing. Using ground-planes on both layers
allow to simplify the routing process and to reduce overall EMI emissions of the
board.

28.1.2 MCU Package

The MCU package choice is often related to the whole PCB technology. STM32
MCUs are provided in several package variants. The most common and “simple
to use” packages are the LQFP ones, like the LQFP-64 package used for all
Nucleo boards. Packages with exposed pins have several advantages:

     They are easy to solder, even by hand for low-volume productions or for
     prototypes. With a little bit of practice, they can be soldered with the drag
     soldering technique146, or simply placed on a PCB pre-covered with the
     solder paste using a stencil.
     They are easy to inspect using conventional Automatic Optical Inspection
     (AOI) machines, and they do not require x-ray inspection, which increases
     the production cost of your boards.
     They cost less for low and mid-volume productions, compared to other type
     of packages.
    They can be used on 2-layers low class PCBs (even a pattern class equal to
    6 is sufficient147), different from other packages (like the BGA ones) that
    usually require more advanced PCB due the use of vias with a reduced
    annular ring.
    They provide a lot of signal I/O to interface external peripherals (this is
    obviously, but it is always good to remark it).

However, if space is a strict requirement for your design, then you have to
consider BGA and similar packages, which offer more signal I/O in a smaller
footprint.

28.1.3 Decoupling of Power-Supply Pins

An important design step is the decoupling of every power supply pair (VDD,
VSS). The key aspects can be summarized here:

    Each power couple (VDD, VSS) should be connected to a parallel ceramic
    capacitor of about 100nF (which is a widespread proven value) plus one
    4.7µF ceramic capacitor for the overall MCU. It is best to choose 0805 or
    smaller capacitors (the smaller is the better is, since smaller capacitors
    have less ESR - for an STM32F7, 0402 capacitors is an option to
    consider). These capacitors need to be placed as close as possible to the
    appropriate pins, or the underside of the PCB if a BGA package is used for
    the fastest STM32 MCUs. If a ground plane is used, it is safe to connect
    VSS pins directly to the ground plane if this is extensive around that pin.
    This author also uses a large electrolytic capacitor (typically 10µF - a
    tantalum capacitor is also OK if your budget allows it) no more than 3cm
    away from the chip. The purpose of this capacitor is to be a reservoir of
    charge to supply the instantaneous charge requirements of the circuits
    locally, so the charge need not come through the inductance of the power
    trace.
    A small ferrite bead (with an impedance ranging from 600 to 1000Ω)
    placed in series between the analog power supply (AVDD) and digital
    power supply (VDD)148. It is used to:
          Localizes the noise in the system.
          Keeps external high frequency noise from the IC.
          Keeps internally generated noise from propagating to the rest of the
          system.
     If your STM32 MCU provides a VBAT pin, it can be connected to the
     external battery (1.65 V < VBAT < 3.6 V). If no external battery is used, it
     is recommended to connect this pin to VDD with a 100nF external ceramic
     decoupling capacitor.

Figure 28.2 shows the reference schematics of an STM32F030CC MCU, while
Figure 28.3 shows the typical layout style used by this author to proper decouple
power pins. As you can see, a solid ground plane ensures that decoupling
capacitors are connected to the ground with the shortest possible path149.

This document from Texas Instruments is a good introduction to this topic.

Figure 28.2: The minimal reference schematics for an STM32F030
                                           MCU
Figure 28.3: The preferred way by the author of this
                            book to place decoupling capacitors

28.1.4 Clocks

If your design needs an external clock source, either the LSE or HSE one, special
attention must be placed to the position of the external crystal and the selection of
the capacitors used to match its load capacitance (this value is established by the
crystal manufacturer, and it must be carefully checked during the selection
process).

ST provides a really excellent guide (AN2867) about oscillator design.
Summarizing that guide is outside the scope of this paragraph, so I strongly
suggest having a look at that application note. However, it is important to
underline some things.

The most starting up errors (that is, the MCU does not want to properly boot in
our final design when the external crystal is used) arises from bad choice of the
external capacitors and bad placing of the crystal. For example, assuming a stray
capacitance equal to 5pF and a crystal capacitance equal to 15pF, the following
formula can be used to compute the value of external capacitors:

    = 2(     -       ) = 2(15pF - 5pF) = 20pF.
Moreover, it is best to place the crystal as close as possible to the MCU pins,
surrounding it by a separated ground plane, in turn connected to the bottom
ground plane, as shown in Figure 28.4 (the bottom ground plane is not shown).

ST shows several “bad examples” in its Application Note. Moreover, all
STM32 MCUs provide a useful feature to debug external oscillator issues: the
Clock Security System (CSS). CSS is a self-diagnostic peripheral that detects
the failure of the HSE. If this happens, HSE is automatically disabled (this means
that the internal HSI is automatically enabled) and a NMI interrupt is raised to
inform the software that something is wrong with the HSE. So, if your board
refuses to work correctly, I strongly suggest you write down the exception
handler for NMI, as described in Chapter 10. If the code hangs inside it, then
there is a problem with your oscillator design.

Finally, consider that a lot of EMC issues come from bad placing of external
clocks. Pay attention to the instructions contained in the ST application note.

       The most of STM32 MCUs allow to connect an external or internal clock source (a PLL, the HSI
       or HSE and so on) to an output pin, called Master Clock Output(MCO). This is useful in some
       application, where this clock source may be used to drive an external IC or in audio applications.
       However, pay attention to avoid long traces between the MCU and the device connected to the
       MCO pin. In this case you have to consider the MCU like a normal clock source, and hence you
       have to pay attention both to the length of the trace and to cross-talks between MCO and other
       adjacent or underlying traces.
Figure 28.4: A good design way to place external
                        crystals using a separated ground plane

28.1.5 Filtering of RESET Pin

To avoid unwanted reset of your board, it is strongly recommended to connect a
decoupling capacitor (100nF is a proven value) between the RESET pin (named
NRST) and the ground, even if your design does not require the use of the reset
pin.

28.1.6 Debug Port

In order to develop and test the firmware for the new board, or to simply upload
it to production devices, you need a way to interact with the target STM32 MCU
using its debug port. STM32 MCUs offer several ways to debug them. One of
this is through the use of the Serial Wire Debug (SWD) interface. SWD replaces
the traditional JTAG port, using a clock line (named SWDCLK) and a single bi-
directional data pin (named SWDIO150), providing all the normal JTAG debug and
test functionality plus real-time access to system memory without halting the
processor or requiring any target resident code (the condition for this to happen
is that the SWD related I/O are not remapped to a different function - e.g., a
general purpose output GPIO). Moreover, it is possible to use any ST-LINK
debugger as debug device for your custom boards: all ST development boards
(and, hence, the Nucleo too) are designed so that you can disconnect the target
MCU from the ST-LINK interface and connect it to your board.

Figure 28.5: How to use the Nucleo as ST-LINK debugger

Figure 28.5 shows how to use a Nucleo as external debugger for a custom board.
First, remove the two jumpers from the CN2 pin header. Next, connect the PIN1
of SWD pin header to a VDD (3.3V or lower) source of your custom board,
PIN2 to the SWDCLK pin of the STM32 MCU in your board, PIN3 to the GND,
PIN4 to SWDIO pin and finally the PIN5 to the NRST pin of the target STM32
MCU (this step is optional, at least in theory). The connection may be easily
done simply routing those signals to a convenient pin header, which plays the
role of debug port for your custom board. The SWO pin is also available on the
SWD pin header, and it corresponds to the PIN6. However, the SWO is connected
to the target MCU through a SMD jumper (SB15). So, if you want to use SWV
functionality on you board, you will need to desolder that jumper.

Another useful feature to have on this debug port may be at least the USART TX
pin of one of the available MCU USARTs. This could help you a lot during the
development process, using it to print messages on a console to trace the
firmware execution, even if it is not under debugging. Again, you could use the
Nucleo board to interface the target MCU TTL USART to the Nucleo VCP,
connecting USART pins to the CN3 connector on the Nucleo board, as shown in
Figure 28.6. If so, you may need to desolder SB13 and SB13 jumper on your
Nucleo or leave PA2 and PA3 of the target Nucleo MCU floating.
Figure 28.6: The CN3 connector allow to use the ST-
                               LINK VCP with any other USART

       Read Carefully

       As said before, the SWD interface requires just two pins. These are named SWDIO and SWDCLK.
       You can easily identify them using CubeMX (more about this later) or downloading the right
       datasheet for your MCU. However, it is strongly suggested to use also the NRST pin for debugging.
       This is required because the STM32 microcontrollers allow to change the function of SWD pins,
       both for wanted design reason and for an invalid firmware state after a fault condition (e.g., an
       invalid memory access has corrupted the peripheral memory). Without routing the NRST signal to
       the debug port, it is impossible to connect to the target MCU “under reset”, that is resetting the
       MCU just few CPU cycles before the MCU is placed under debug. This will help you in some
       critical situations. So, to resume, always route to the custom “debug connector” on your
       board at least SWDIO, SWDCLK and NRST pins, plus VDD and GND.

28.1.7 Boot Mode

Depending on the specific microcontroller model you are going to use in your
design, STM32 MCUs can load firmware from different sources: internal or
external flash, internal or external SDRAM, USART and USB are the most
common sources for starting the firmware execution. This is an exciting feature
of this platform described in Chapter 22.

This happens thanks to the fact that several boot loaders are pre-programmed in
the System memory (the sub-region of code area starting from 0x1FFF F000)
during the MCU production. Each boot loader can be selected configuring one or
two pins named BOOT0 and BOOT1151.
The default behavior, that is the regular boot from the internal flash, is obtained
pulling to the ground at least BOOT0 pin and leaving BOOT1 pin (if present)
floating. Once the firmware starts the execution, you can reuse BOOT pins as
general I/O.

28.1.8 Pay attention to “pin-to-pin” Compatibility…

A lot of STM32 microcontrollers are designed to be pin-to-pin compatible with
other MCUs in the same series and between different series. This allows you to
“simply” switch to a more/less performant model in case you need to adapt your
design for budget reasons or if you are looking for a more powerful MCU.

However, the pin-to-pin compatibility is a feature that needs to be planned during
the MCU selection process, even for MCUs belonging to the same STM32 series.
Let us consider this example152. Suppose that you decide to use an STM32 MCU
from the STM32F030 catalogue, and suppose that you choose the STM32F030R8
MCU, the one equipping the STM32F030 Nucleo. As soon as the board design is
finished, and gerber files are sent to the PCB fab, you start developing the
firmware (this is what often happens especially if you have to complete the
project one day before you start developing it). After a while, you discover that
the 8k of SRAM provided by this MCU are not sufficient for your project. So,
you decide to switch to the STM32F030RC model, which provides 32K of
SRAM and 256K of internal flash. However, after struggling several hours trying
to understand why you cannot flash it, you discover that this model requires four
additional power sources (PF4, PF5, PF6 and PF7), as you can see in Figure
28.7.
Figure 28.7: The STM32F030RC MCU requires four additional power
                        sources compared to the STM32F030R8 one

So, how to avoid these kinds of mistakes? The best option is to plan for the
worst case. In this specific case you may do a layout of your board that connects
those pins (PF4, PF5, PF6 and PF7) to power sources even if you are going to
use the STM32F030R8 model (being those pins regular I/O pins, it is ok to
connect them to VDD and VSS, in parallel with decoupling capacitors).

Take note that CubeMX provides an excellent feature to check the pin-to-pin
compatibility. You can find it in Pinout->List Pinout Compatible MCUs (see
Figure 28.8). It automatically warns you if the MCU is 100% compatible or not
with the current one.

Figure 28.8: How CubeMX can help in identify pin-to-pin
                                   compatible MCUs
28.1.9 …And to Selecting the Right Peripherals

The most of STM32 MCUs have multiple peripherals of a given type (SPI1,
SPI2, etc.). This is a good thing for complex designs with multiple modules, but
special care must be placed during the peripheral selection even for simple
designs. And this is not only a problem related to the I/Os allocation. For
example, let us suppose that you are basing your design on an STM32F030 MCU,
and suppose that your design needs an UART and a SPI interface. You decide to
use UART1 and SPI2 peripherals. During the firmware development, for
performance reasons you decide to use both in DMA mode. However, looking to
Table 9.2 you can see that it is not allowed to use SPI2_TX and USART1_RX in
DMA mode simultaneously (they share the same channel). So, it is best to plan
these software design choices while you are writing down the schematics.

If you are designing a device that will enter deeper sleep modes, like the standby
one, and you want your device to be woken up by the user (maybe by pressing a
dedicated button), then remember that usually just two I/Os can be used to this
task (they are called wake up pins). So, avoid assigning those pins to other
usages.

28.1.10 The Role of CubeMX During the Board Design Stage

Sometimes, I talk with people about CubeMX. A lot of them have a wrong
consideration of what CubeMX is. Some of them consider it as a totally useless
tool. Others limit its usage to the software development stage. There is nothing
more wrong.

CubeMX is probably more useful during the hardware design process (both
when drawing schematics and when doing board layout) than in the firmware
development stage. Once you get familiar with the CubeHAL, you will stop to
use CubeMX as a tool for the IDE project generation153. But CubeMX is
essential during the design stage unless you are going to reuse previous designs
or to base your projects always on few types of STM32 MCUs.

The most important part of CubeMX during the board design is the Chip view.
Thanks to this representation you can “preview” in your mind the layout of the
MCU part, and eventually adopt different layout strategies.
CubeMX is a tool that can be used iteratively. Let us me explain this concept
better with an example.
Suppose that you need to design a board based on an STM32F030C8Tx MCU. It
is an LQFP-48 MCU from the F0 line. Suppose also that you need to use:

     Two SPI interfaces (SPI1 and SPI2).
     An I²C interface (I2C1).
     An external low speed clock source (LSE).
     Five GPIOs.
     An UART (UART2).

Once you have started a new project with this MCU, CubeMX shows you the
MCU representation in the Chip view, as shown below.

Figure 28.9: CubeMX
                                  shows a graphical
                             representation of the MCU
                                when a new project is
                                      started

This immediately gives you three facts:

     You can quickly derive that your board will need 6 decoupling capacitors, 5
     for the power sources (4x100nF + 1x4.7uF) and 1x100nF for the NRST pin.
     PIN7 is the NRST pin and it must be decoupled.
     PIN44 is the BOOT0 pin and it must be pulled-down.
       Read Carefully

       Never forget to tie to the ground the BOOT0 pin using a pull-down resistor (this reduce the power
       leakage). It is a common mistake for novices of this platform to leave that pin unconnected, or
       worst connecting it to a voltage source. STM32 hardware designers are divided in two groups:
       those that have forgotten to tie BOOT0 to the ground and those that will forget to do it.

The next step involves enabling all the required peripherals, the LSE and the
SWD interface, leaving out the 5 GPIOs for the moment. We obtain the following
representation in CubeMX:

Figure 28.10: How CubeMX shows
                               you the MCU when new peripherals
                                          are enabled

Ok. Now it is the good time to start writing down the board schematics,
connecting the other devices to the MCU pins. Once you have completed this part
of the schematics, you can start doing the layout process. In this phase, you
discover that it is not simple to route the SPI1 signals to PA5, PA6 and PA7. So,
doing a Ctrl+Click on the SPI1 signals you discover that you can remap them to
PB3, PB4 and PB5, obtaining the following representation:
Figure 28.11: Pre-visualizing the
                            MCU can help you during board
                                         layout

Now you can update your schematics and hence complete the layout of this part.
Once the layout is almost complete, you can assign the 5 GPIO to the MCU pins,
deciding which one best fits your layout. This is the reason why CubeMX can be
used iteratively.

Another important thing regarding CubeMX is the ability to give custom names to
signals. This is simply accomplished going into Pinout->Pins/Signal Options
(see Figure 28.12). CubeMX will use the custom labels to generate
corresponding C macros inside the main.h file. For example, an I/O labeled
“TX_EN” will generate a macro named TX_EN_Pin to indicate the pin and a
macro named TX_EN_GPIO_Port to indicate the corresponding GPIO port. This
is important especially if you keep synchronized the CAD documentation and the
project source files. It will help you to write better and more portable code.

Finally, I prefer to prefix the name of all high-speed signals with “HS_”. This
will guide you during the design process: if your CAD allows you to place
constraints on nets, it will simplify the routing process, avoiding mistakes that
would appear only during test phase.
Figure 28.12: How to assign custom names to PINs

28.1.11 Board Layout Strategies

The layout of the final board is a sort of “art”, a complex task that involves a
deep knowledge of all modules used in your design. This is the reason why in
large organizations this work is accomplished by specific engineers.

Here, I would like to provide a brief introduction to the whole process based on
my personal experience.

     A good layout is all about component placing: if you are new to this task,
     remember that all starts from placing components on the final board. Every
     board can be logically and physically divided in sub-modules: power part,
     MCU and digital part, analog part and so no. Don’t start routing signals
     before you have placed all components on the final board. Moreover, a
     good subdivision in sub-modules allows you to reuse design for different
     boards.
     Follow these steps when doing the layout of an STM32 MCU:
          start placing the MCU;
          if your board need external clock sources, place them immediately
          close to the MCU pins;
          next place all decoupling capacitors needed;
          connect power sources to the corresponding power lines or power
          planes if your layer stackup allows them;
          never forget to tie to the ground BOOT0 pin if needed, and to
          decouple NRST pin;
          if your design need an external SRAM or a fast flash memory, start
          placing them and route differential pair first;
          route all high speed signals;
          route remaining signals;
          avoid using too many vias during the signal routing and use CubeMX
          looking for better alternatives (that is, use other equivalent signal I/Os
          if possible).

28.2 Software Design
Once you have completed the hardware design, you can start developing the
firmware part. If you have used CubeMX to design the MCU section of your
custom board, you should be able to start coding the firmware immediately. If the
CubeMX project observes faithfully the actual board design, you can simply
generate the project as we have done for the Nucleo development board, then you
can import it inside a new STM32CubeIDE project and start working on your
application. Nothing different from what described in Chapter 3.

If you have already developed the firmware using a development board, and you
need to adapt it to your custom design, you may proceed in this way:

     Generate a fresh new CubeMX project both for your development board
     (e.g., the Nucleo-F030), enabling the needed peripherals, and for the custom
     board you have designed.
     Do a comparison between the initialization routines for the used
     peripherals: if they differ, start replacing them one by one in the project
     made for the development board, and do a complete project compilation
     before to continue with the next peripheral. This will allow you to keep the
     control of what is changing in your firmware.
     To simplify the porting process, never change the peripheral initialization
     code generated by CubeMX, but use CubeMX to change peripheral settings.
     Try to use macros to wrap peripheral handlers. Once you change them, you
     only need to redefine the macros (for example, if your firmware developed
     with the Nucleo uses the USART2 peripheral, define a global macro in this
     way: #define USART_PERIPHERAL huart2 and base your code on that
     macro; if your new design uses the USART1, then you have to redefine only
     that macro accordingly).
Remember that CubeMX essentially generates 5 or 6 files. If you reduce the
modification to these files at minimum, it will be easy to rearrange the code.

Having a minimum viable firmware made with a development kit helps a lot
during the debugging of your custom board. It happens often that, during the
testing of a new board, you are in doubt if your issues arise from the hardware or
the software. Knowing that the firmware works simplifies the hardware
debugging stage.

28.2.1 Generating the binary image for production

In large organizations, who effectively loads the binary image of the firmware on
the final board is a completely different person. As as engineer, you may be
asked to generate an image of the final firmware in release mode. This is a way
to indicate a binary image of the firmware compiled with the highest possible
optimization level, in order to reduce the final size of the image, and without
including any debug information. This last requirement is needed both to reduce
the size of binary image and to protect the intellectual property (the ELF file of a
firmware compiled with debug symbols usually contains the whole firmware
source code, so that GDB can show you the original source code while
debugging).

From the Eclipse/GCC point of view, generating a binary image in release mode
is nothing more than to configure the project accordingly. You might have already
noticed that every new Eclipse project comes with two Build Configurations
(go to Project->Build Configurations->Manage menu if you have never used
this feature before): one named Debug and one Release. A build configuration is
nothing more than a project configuration, and you can have as many separated
configurations as you want in a single project.
Figure 28.13: The Eclipse project settings
                        dialog allows to switch to another build
                                   configuration easily

Figure 28.13 shows the project settings dialog (go to Project->Properties menu
to open it). The C/C++ Build->Settings pane allows to configure the build
options. Moreover, as you can see in Figure 28.13, you can quickly move to
another build configuration using the Configuration combo-box. In the Cross
ARM C++ Compiler->Optimization section we can setup the GCC optimization
levels. GCC provides 6 optimization levels. Let us briefly introduce them:

    -O0: this corresponds to the no optimization level. It generates unoptimized
    code but usually has the fastest compilation time. Note that other compilers
    do extensive optimizations even if no optimization is specified. With GCC,
    it is very unusual to use -O0 for production if execution time is of any
    concern, since -O0 does mean no optimization at all. This difference
    between GCC and other compilers should be kept in mind when doing
    performance comparisons.
    -O1: this corresponds to a moderate optimization. It optimizes reasonably
    well but does not degrade compilation time significantly.
    -O2: this corresponds to full optimization. It generates highly optimized
    code and has the slowest compilation time.
    -O3: this also corresponds to full optimization as in “-O2”, but it also uses
    more aggressive automatic inlining of subprograms within a unit and
    attempts to vectorize loops.
    -Os: this corresponds to optimization for space. It optimizes space usage
    (both code and data) of resulting program.
     -Ofast: this corresponds to optimization for speed. It optimizes code to
     increase its speed at expense fo the final binary size.
     -Og: this corresponds to optimization for debug. It enables optimizations
     that do not interfere with debugging. It should be the optimization level of
     choice for the standard edit-compile-debug cycle, offering a reasonable
     level of optimization while maintaining fast compilation and a good
     debugging experience.

By default, the GCC optimization level for the Release configuration is -Os.
Higher optimization levels perform more global transformations on the program
and apply more expensive analysis algorithms in order to generate faster and
more compact code. However, in embedded programming is usually suggested to
start the development using the no optimization (-O0) level. This because more
aggressive optimizations my lead to different behavior of time-constrained
routines. As a rule of thumb, develop your firmware with the -O0 or the -Og
levels, and start increasing it as long as you test all its features. Sometimes, it
also happens that a firmware working perfectly when compiled with the -O0
level stops working at all when a more aggressive optimization is chosen. This
often happens we have not correctly declared shared and global variables as
volatile, and they are optimized to the compilers causing wrong behavior of
ISR routines or different threads if we are using an RTOS.

Another important configuration parameter for the Release configuration is
related to Debug level. This feature is configured inside the Cross ARM C++
Compiler->Debugging view, and GCC offers four increasing levels: None, -g1,
-g (the default in Release configuration) and -g3. If you want to generate a binary
image without debug information, select the None level.
Appendix
