D. Differences with the 1st edition
The next paragraphs report all differences between the 1st and 2nd edition of
the book.

Chapter 1
     New paragraphs about:
         ARM TrustZone
         STM32G0, STM32G4, STM32L5, STM32U5 families
         Minor modifications to the text removing no longer updated
         information and adapting some parts to more recent evolutions of
         the STM32 portfolio
     Updated paragraphs about:
         STM32F7 and STM32H7 series

Chapter 2
Chapter 2 was completely rewritten to cover STM32CubeIDE installation on
Windows, MacOS and Linux.

Chapter 3 and 4
Chapter 3 and 4 were completely rewritten according to the project
generation procedure of the STM32CubeIDE tool-chain and the new
STM32CubeMX 6.x

Chapter 5
Chapter 5 was completely rewritten to cover STM32CubeIDE debug
capabilities. The first edition of the book was based on the usage of
OpenOCD acting as GDB server. While the STM32CubeIDE still offers the
possibility to use OpenOCD as alternative to the ST-LINK GDB Server, I
cannot see any notably reason to not use the official ST tooling. Finally, the
I/O retargeting (that is, the usage of standard C printf()/scanf() routines)
is now shown in this chapter instead of the Chapter 8.

Chapter 6
Chapter 6 was adapted so that all examples, figures and tables are related to
the STM32F072RB MCU, since the STM32F030 is no longer used as
platform for book examples.
Fixed some errors in the text.

Chapter 7
Chapter 7 was updated to cover some feature of the Cortex-M33 cores, used
on STM32U5 and STM32L5 families.
Fixed some errors in the text.

Chapter 8
Chapter 8 was updated to cover more recent CubeMX features. Example 3
was improved with a better implementation of the circular buffer. Fixed
some errors in the text.

Chapter 9
Chapter 9 was updated to cover recent STM32 MCUs with the more
advanced DMAMUX module. All examples were updated accordingly.
The Chapter was updated to cover more recent CubeMX features.
Fixed some errors in the text.

Chapter 10
Chapter 10 was updated with all recent STM32 MCUs. Moreover, the new
Nucleo-64 boards with integrated ST-LINK v3 debugger are documented in a
separated section.
The Chapter was updated to cover more recent CubeMX features.
Fixed some errors in the text.
Chapter 11
Chapter 11 was updated to cover more recent CubeMX features. Some
examples were improved with a better implementation. Fixed some errors in
the text.

Chapter 12-22

Chapters 12-22 were updated to cover more recent CubeMX features and
more recent STM32 MCUs. Fixed several errors in the text.

Chapter 23

Chapter 23 was updated to cover FreeRTOS 10.x features and the new
CMSIS-RTOS v2 layer. Moreover, some new advanced topics have been
added. For example, it is now deeply explained how to configure the project
to enable re-entrancy of the newlib C run-time library.

Chapter 24
Chapter 24 was completely rewritten to cover the advanced debugging
features offered by the STM32CubeIDE tool-chain.

Chapter 25-26
Chapters 25-26 were updated to cover more recent CubeMX features and
more recent STM32 MCUs. Fixed several errors in the text.

Chapter 27
Chapters 27 is totally new.

Chapter 28
Chapters 28 were updated to cover more recent CubeMX features. Fixed
several errors in the text.
Notes
1 Negative feedback is also welcome ;-)↩

Introduction
1 This is not entirely true, since there are other instructions available in the
ARMv6/7 architecture that access memory locations, but for the purpose of
this discussion it is best to consider that sentence to be true. ↩

2 That assembly code was generated compiling in thumb mode with any
optimization disabled, invoking GCC in the following way: $ arm-none-
eabi-gcc -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -fverbose-asm -save-temps -
O0 -g -c file.c↩

3 Although the memory layout and the size of sub-regions (and therefore
also their addresses) are standardized between all Cortex-M cores, some
functionalities may differ. For example, Cortex-M7 does not provide bit-
band regions, and some peripherals in the Private Peripheral Bus region
differ. Always consult the reference manual for the architecture you are
considering. ↩

4 To increase readability, all 32-bit addresses in this book are written
splitting the upper two bytes from the lower ones. So, every time you see an
address expressed in this way (0x0000 0000) you have to interpret it just as
one common 32-bit address (0x00000000). This rule does not apply to C and
assembly source code.↩

5 The final address is computed in the following way: 20K is equal to 20 *
1024 bytes, which in base 16 is 0x5000. But addresses start from 0, hence
the final address is 0x2000 0000 + 0x4FFF.↩

6 That assembly code was generated compiling in thumb mode with any
optimization disabled, invoking GCC in the following way: $ arm-none-
eabi-gcc -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -fverbose-asm -save-temps -
O0 -g -c file.c↩

7 Anyone who has already played with Nucleo boards, knows that user LED
LD2 (the green one) is connected to that port pin.↩

8 With the term task we refer to a series of instructions which constitute the
main flow of execution. If our firmware is based on an OS, the scenario
could be a bit more articulated. Moreover, in case of low-power sleep mode,
the CPU may be configured to go back to sleep after an interrupt management
routine is executed. We will analyse these more complex scenarios in
following chapters.↩

9 Also the Reset exception cannot be disabled, even if it is improper to talk
about the Reset exception disabling, since it is the first exception generated
after the MCU resets. As we will see in Chapter 7, the Reset exception is the
actual entry point of every STM32 application. ↩

10 Source ST AN3430↩

11 This picture is taken from Zeptobars.ru, a really fantastic blog. Its
authors decap (that is, remove the protective casing) integrated circuits in
acid and publish images of what’s inside the chip. I love those images,
because they show what humans were able to achieve in electronics. ↩

12 Due to the silicon market crisis in the twenties, this slogan is no longer
valid. The crazy situation of the IC industry pushed prices of low-cost ICs
(which are the most affected ones) by more than 25%. However, misery
loves company and for low-cost applications STM32F0 family is still an
interesting series to evaluate, unless a 8-bit solution is suitable for you.↩

13 a CHM file is a typical Microsoft file format used to distribute
documentation in HTML format in just one file. It is really common on the
Windows OS, and you can find several good free tools on MacOS and Linux
to read them.↩
14 F0/G0/L0 are the only STM32 families that provides this convenient
package. ↩

15 A good list of MCU manufacturers can be found here
(http://bit.ly/1VUkN2e). Please, take note that in the last years several of the
mentioned companies have merged to try to survive in a market that has
become very crowded.↩

16 The Ethernet phyther (also called Ethernet PHY) is a device which
translates messages exchanged over a LAN network in electrical signals. ↩

17 Figure 1.20 and 22 are taken from the mbed.org website and they refer to
the Nucleo-F401RE board. Please, refer to Appendix C for the right pin-out
of your Nucleo board.↩

18 Please, take note that ST places the STM32G4 family in the Mainstream
segment. However, with a core running at 170MHz it can be considered an
High Performance MCU. So, in this book, you will find the Nucleo-G474RE
classified in the High Performance series.↩

19 In this book all screen captures, unless differently required, are based on
Mac OS, because it is the OS the author uses to develop STM32 applications
(and to write this book). However, they also apply to other Operating
Systems.↩

20 We are not going to describe now all generated files and folders. This is
just a brief introduction. In later chapters we will have the opportunity to
better analyze them. Do not spend too much time on them now.↩

21 Every C/C++ compiler needs to be aware of where to look for include
files (files ending with .h). These folders are called include folders (or,
more properly, include paths) and their paths must be specified to GCC
using the -I parameter. However, Eclipse can do this for us automatically and
the include folder visually shows the search paths where GCC will look for
include files.↩
22 Experienced STM32 programmers know that it is improper to say that
the main() function is the entry point of an STM32 application. The
execution of the firmware begins much earlier, with the calling of some
important setup routines that create the execution environment for the
firmware. However, from the application point of view, its start is inside the
main() function. A following chapter will show in detail the bootstrap
process of an STM32 microcontroller.↩

23 Depending on your development board, especially if you are not using a
Nucleo-64, you may find additional routines invoked inside the main()
function. This means that your development board provides additional
peripherals compared to the standard Nucleo-64 board (remember that we
answered “Yes” when STM32CubeIDE asked us to automatically initialize
all peripherals in their default mode. So, do not care too much if your
main() differs a little from the one shown here.↩

24 Except for the Nucleo-F302RB, where LD2 is connected to PB13 port.
More about this next.↩

25 The number of bytes required for each binary section (text, bss, and so
on) may differ from the yours. This happens because the HALs differ
between each STM32 series and due to different compiler optimization
levels. Do not pay attention to these details that will be much clearer later.↩

26 Probably, one day someone will explain them that, except for rare and
specific cases, a modern compiler can generate better assembly code from C
than could be written directly in assembly by hand. However, we have to say
that these habits are limited to ultra low-cost 8-bit MCUs like PIC12 and
similar.↩

27 STM32CubeMX name will be simplified in CubeMX in the rest of the
book.↩

28 The standalone version of CubeMX can generate project code and
configuration not only for the official STM32CubeIDE, but also for other
commercial IDEs. However, in this book we will focus exclusively on the
aspects related to the usage of CubeMX inside the STM32CubeIDE.↩
29 In this context, pin and signal can be used as synonyms.↩

30 In some Nucleo boards the LD2 LED is connected to different pins. For
example, in the Nucleo-F302 LD2 is wired to PB13 pin. Consult the manual
for your very specific board before configuring it.↩

31 The pin configurations shown in this section are referred to the
STM32L073RZ MCU.↩

32 Take note that in recent CubeMX version the Ctrl+click behavior has
been slightly changed. To show the alternative pin you need to keep pressed
the mouse after a Ctrl+click until the alternative pin starts blinking. Not that
intuitive the first time you do it. ↩

33 Well… It is never a good idea to start learning embedding programming
with an STM32H7 ;-P. ↩

34 The Nucleo ST-LINK debugger is designed so that it can be used as
standalone adapter to debug an external device (e.g., a board designed by
you equipping an STM32 MCU). Consult the documentation of your Nucleo
board to configure it accordingly.↩

35 One common misunderstanding about the STM32 platform is that all
STM32 devices have a common and standardized way to access to their
internal FLASH. This is not true, since every STM32 family has specific
capabilities regarding their peripherals, including the internal flash. This
requires ST-LINK GDB Server to provide drivers to handle all STM32
devices. ↩

36 Take note that the following steps are a very simplified view of the
actual operations carried out in a debug session. A lot of details are omitted,
because a detailed description would require a deep knowledge of several
Cortex-M details, several STM32 technicalities and a decent knowledge of
the GDB framework. ↩

37 The complete set of command-line arguments is well documented in the
related user manual available at this address: https://bit.ly/3EfV2aH↩
38 A watchpoint, indeed, is a more advanced debugging primitive that
allows to define conditional breakpoints over data and peripheral registers,
that is the MCU halts its execution only if a variable satisfies an expression
(e.g. var == 10). We will analyze watchpoints in Chapter 24.↩

39 To interact with the serial console you need a terminal emulator. For
more information, follow the instructions in Chapter 8. ↩

40 For the sake of completeness, the solution implemented in the CH5-EX1
is not that fast. This for two reasons. First of all, it uses the CubeHAL that is
not implemented considering the code speed as a fundamental requirement.
Secondly, it uses the UART in polling mode: the UART itself is not a high-
speed peripheral, and driving it in polling mode makes the code calling the
HAL_UART_Trasmit() really slow. Even printing a string of few characters
will slow down a lot your code. For this reason, consider the retarget.c
just as a bare-bone example. It should be coded by using the UART in
interrupt mode or - a lot better - in DMA mode. We will study these
advanced topics later in text. ↩

Diving into the HAL
1 Here, to simplify this topic, we are considering the bus organization of
one of the simplest STM32 microcontrollers, the STM32F072. STM32F4
and STM32F7, for example, have a more advanced bus interconnection
system, which is outside the scope of this book. Please, always refer to the
reference manual of your MCU.↩

2 For some of you the above description may be unclear and too complex to
understand. Don’t worry and keep reading the next content in this chapter.
They will become clear once you reach the chapter dedicated to the DMA.↩

3 Both Table 6.1 and Figure 6.1 are taken from the ST STM32F072
Reference Manual (https://bit.ly/2XzzJ3s).↩

4 This not exactly true, since the HAL, to save RAM space, defines GPIOA
as a macro (#define GPIOA ((GPIO_TypeDef *) GPIOA_BASE)). ↩
5 Take note that the GPIO_PIN_x is a bit mask, where the i-th pin
corresponds to the i-th bit of a uint16_t datatype. For example, the
GPIO_PIN_5 has a value of 0x0020, which is 32 in base 10. ↩

6 During and just after reset, the alternate functions are not active, and all
the I/O ports are configured in Input Floating mode. ↩

7 The figure is taken from the ST STM32F072 Reference Manual
(https://bit.ly/2XzzJ3s).↩

8 This exception is not available in Cortex-M0/0+ based
microcontrollers.↩

9 Apart from the Cortex-M0, the rest of Cortex-M cores allow to relocate
the position in memory of the vector table. Moreover, it is possible to force
the MCU to boot up from different memories than the internal flash one.
These are advanced topics that will be covered in Chapter 20 about memory
layout and another one dedicated to booting process. To avoid confusion in
unexperienced readers it is best to consider the vector table position fixed
and bound to the 0x0000 0000 address.↩

10 Sometimes, it also happens that different peripherals share the same
request line, even in Cortex-M3/4/7 based MCUs where up to 240
configurable request lines are available. For example, in an STM32F446RE
MCU, timer TIM6 shares its global IRQ with DAC1 and DAC2 under-run
error interrupts. ↩

11 The example is designed to work with a Nucleo-F446RE board. Please,
refer to other book examples if you have a different Nucleo board.↩

12 Another feature of the ARM architectures is the ability to use
conventional C functions as ISRs. When an interrupt fires, the CPU switches
from the Threaded mode (that is, the main execution flow) to the Handler
mode. During this switching process, the current execution context is saved
thanks to a procedure named stacking. The CPU itself is responsible of
storing the previous saved context when the ISR terminates the execution
(unstacking). The explanation of this procedure is outside from the scope of
this book. For more information about these aspects, refer to one of the
Joseph Yiu books.↩

13 Don’t consider those time intervals related to the CPU cycles, they are
just used to indicate “subsequent” events.↩

14 Here, it is important to understand the with the word “immediately” we
are not saying that the interrupt execution starts without delay. If no other
interrupts are running, Cortex-M3/4/7/33 cores serve an interrupt in 12 CPU
cycles, while Cortex-M0 does it in 15 cycles and Cortex-M0+ in 16
cycles.↩

15 For the sake of completeness, it is important to specify that Cortex-M
architecture is designed so that if an interrupt fires while the processor is
already servicing another interrupt, this will be serviced without restoring
the previous application doing the unstacking (refer to note 3 in this chapter
for the definition of stacking/unstacking). This technique is called tail
chaining and it allows to speed up interrupt management and to reduce
power consumption.↩

16 The example is designed to work with a Nucleo-F072RB board. Please,
refer to other book examples if you have a different Nucleo board.↩

17 Please, take note that for STM32F302 MCUs the default name of the IRQ
associated to EXTI line 2 is EXTI2_TSC_IRQHandler. Refer to book
examples if you are working with this MCU.↩

18 Usually, a capacitor and a resistor in parallel with the switch contacts
are sufficient in most cases. For example, you can take a look at schematics
of the Nucleo board to see how ST engineers have debounced the USER
button connected to PC13 GPIO.↩

19 What complicates the understanding of interrupt priorities is the fact that
in the official documentation sometimes the preemption priority is also
called group priority. This leads to a lot of confusion, since novices tends to
imagine that these bits define a sort of Access Control List (ACL) privileges.
Here, to simplify the understanding of this matter, we will only speak about
preemption priority level. ↩

20 As stated before, the STM32 MCUs based on Cortex-M33 cores use just
the three upper bits of the IPR register. This means that there is a maximum of
eight priority level and three priority groups. Thus,
NVIC_PRIORITYGROUP_4 is not available at all.↩

21 The example is designed to work with a Nucleo-F401RE board. Please,
refer to other book examples if you have a different Nucleo board.↩

22 Usually, a capacitor and a resistor in parallel with the switch contacts
are sufficient in most cases. For example, you can look at schematics of the
Nucleo board to see how ST engineers have debounced the USER button
connected to PC13 GPIO.↩

23 Joseph Yiu shows a way to bypass this limitation in his books. However,
I strongly discourage from using these tricky techniques unless you really
need interrupt re-entrancy in your application.↩

24 A Timing Diagram is a representation of a set of signals in the time
domain.↩

25 However, keep in mind that the maximum transmission speed is
determined by a lot of other things, like the characteristics of the electrical
channel, the ability of each device involved in transmission to sample fast
signals, and so on.↩

26 Please take note that this statement may not be true if you are using a
Nucleo-32 or Nucleo-144 board. Check the ST documentation for more
about this.↩

27 Starting from this paragraph, the terms USART and UART are used
interchangeably, unless different noticed.↩

28 The analysis of the fields of this C struct is outside of the scope of this
book.↩
29 Please, take note that the list of fields of the struct
UART_HandleTypeDef is not complete. Several fields, not relevant to the
topics covered in this chapter, are omitted here. For more information, refer
to the CubeHAL.↩

30 this field is only used to enable the RS232 flow control. To enable the
RS485 flow control, the HAL provides a specific function,
HAL_RS485Ex_Init(), defined inside the stm32XXxx_hal_uart_ex.c
file.↩

31 Some of you, especially those having a Nucleo-F3, will notice that the
configuration pane may contain a more settings compared to those shown in
Figure 8.5. Please, refer to the reference manual for your target MCU for
more information.↩

32 If we use CubeMX to enable the USARTx_IRQn from the NVIC
configuration section (as shown in Chapter 7), it will automatically place the
call to the HAL_UART_IRQHandler() from the ISR.↩

33 The Figure 8.10 is taken from the STM32F030 Reference Manual
(RM0390).↩

34 This is the reason why transferring a sequence of bytes in interrupt mode
is not a smart thing when the communication speed is too high, or when we
have to transfer a great amount of data very often. Since the transmission of
each byte happens quickly, the CPU will be “flooded” by the interrupts
generated by the UART for every byte transmitted. For continuous
transmission of great sequences of bytes at high speed is best to use the DMA
mode, as we will see in the next chapter.↩

35 The example is designed for an STM32F4. Please, refer to the book
examples for your specific Nucleo.↩

36 This is not exactly true, as we will see next. But it is ok to consider that
sentence true here.↩
37 ST provides a dedicated application note about the DMA for every
STM32 family. For example, the AN2548 (https://bit.ly/3kHEfFH) talks
about the DMA in STM32F0/F1/F3/Gx/Lx MCUs, while the AN4031
(https://bit.ly/3kImCpn) is all about the DMA in STM32F2/F4/F7 families.↩

38 This is what happens in some vector processors equipping really
expensive supercomputers, but this is not the case of 32 cents CPUs like the
STM32.↩

39 Keep in mind that using the UART in interrupt mode does not change the
story. Once the UART generates the interrupt to signal the MCU core that
new data is arriving, it is always up to the CPU to “move” this data byte-by-
byte from UART data register to the SRAM. That’s the reason why from the
performance point of view there is no difference between UART management
in polling and interrupt mode.↩

40 Apart for some high-performance peripherals, like USB and Ethernet
that needs to access to some memory buffers independently to avoid the loss
of important data flowing to the communication medium.↩

41 However, keep in mind that this book does not aim to be an exhaustive
source of hardware details of each STM32 family. Always keep in your
hands the reference manual for the MCU you are considering and look
carefully to the chapter related to the DMA. ↩

42 The table is extracted from the ST RM0360 reference manual
(https://bit.ly/1GfS3iC)↩

43 The figure is taken from the RM0008 reference manual from ST
(https://bit.ly/1TNekGo)↩

44 For the sake of completeness, we have to say that they are based on a
modified Harvard architecture
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modified_Harvard_architecture), but let us
leave the distinction to historians of computer science.↩
45 The figure is taken from the AN4031 application note from ST
(http://bit.ly/1n66sW7)↩

46 The picture shows just the architecture of STM32G4 DMA. However,
the difference among the families is just related to the number of peripheral
requests, triggers and synchronization lines.↩

47 Please, take note that not all struct fields are reported here, but just those
ones the programmer needs to fill. ↩

48 Stream count starts from zero.↩

49 It is important to enable the UART-related interrupt and to invoke the
HAL_UART_IRQHandler() routine, because the HAL is designed so that
UART-related errors (like parity error, overrun error, and so on) may be
raised even when the UART is driven in DMA mode. By catching the error
condition, the HAL suspends the DMA transfer and invokes the
corresponding error callback to signal the error condition to the application
layer.↩

50 Arranging the DMA initialization code for other STM32 MCUs is left as
exercise to the reader.↩

51 Remember that in STM32F2/F4/F7 MCUs only the DMA2 can be used
for this kind of transfers.↩

52 The reason why this happens will be explained in Chapter 20.↩

53 Here I am clearly excluding some “privileged paths” between the
Cortex-M core and SRAM. This is the role of the Core-Coupled Memory
(CCM), a feature available in some STM32 MCUs and that we will explore
better in Chapter 20.↩

54 It is important to remark that the square wave represented in Figure 10.1
is “ideal”. The real square wave of a clock source has a trapezoidal form.↩
55 There exist some STM32 MCUs, especially those ones with low pin
count, that cannot be clocked by an external clock source.↩

56 A 1% accuracy may seem a good compromise, especially if you
consider that you can save PCB space and the cost of a dedicated crystal,
which is a device that has a non-negligible price. However, for time-
constraint applications, 1% may be a huge shift. For example, a day is made
of 86,400 seconds. An error equal to 1% means that in the worst case we can
lose (or earn) up to 864 seconds, which is equal to 14,4 minutes! And things
may worsen if temperature increases. This is the reason why it is mandatory
to use an external low-speed crystal if you are going to use the RTC.
However, a solution to increase this accuracy exists. More about this later.↩

57 In this book we will refer to the high-speed oscillator as an “abstract”
clock source, which has two mutually exclusive “concrete” sources: the HSE
or the HSI oscillator. The same applies to the low-speed oscillator↩

58 Remember that the power consumption of an MCU is about linear with
its frequency. The higher is the frequency, the more power it consumes.↩

59 Except for timers on the APB2 bus.↩

60 A prescaler is an “electronic counter” used to reduce high frequencies.
In this case, the “/2” prescaler reduces the main 8MHz frequency to 4MHz.↩

61 Sometimes, ST defines in its documents the RCC as “peripheral”.
Sometimes no. I am not sure that if it is properly a peripheral, but I will
define it in the same way ST does. Sometimes.↩

62 In STM32L0/1/4 MCUs, the SYSCLK can be also fed by another
dedicated and low-power clock source, named MSI. We will talk about this
clock source next.↩

63 This clearly implies the usage of an RTOS. We will study this matter in a
later chapter.↩
64 The System Clock Mux is the System Clock Switch (SW) seen in Figure
10.3↩

65 By default, ST-LINK v3 is configured so that the MCO is clocked at
HSI/2, which in an STM32F723IEK6 corresponds to 16MHz/2 = 8MHz.
Starting from STLinkUpgrade 3.3.7 it is possible to configure ST-LINK v3
firmware so that MCO is clocked by HSE/3, which corresponds to 25MHz/3
= 8.33MHz. This solution provides a better clock accuracy instead of the
internal HSI trimmed at 1%. In case of a switch to 8.33 MHz, the target
application must be updated accordingly: a factor ×(24/25) must be applied
in the PLL configuration in order to keep the clock tree unchanged behind
(for instance, if PLLN = 400, set PLLN = 384). Moreover, the HSE_VALUE
constant commonly defined into stm32xxx_hal_conf.h must be changed to
value 8333333. For more information refer to the RN0093.↩

66 As we will see in the next chapter, a timer is free counter module, that is
a device that counts from 0 to a given value at every clock cycle. Take note
that, for the sake of completeness, the SysTick timer is a 24-bit downcounter
timer, that is it counts from the configured maximum value (48.000 in our
case) down to zero, and then automatically restarts again. The source clock
of a timer establishes how fast this timer counts. Since here we are
specifying that the clock source for the SysTick timer is the HCLK (line 22),
then the counter will reach zero every 1ms.↩

67 Pay attention that the Cortex-M core is not clocked by the SYSCLK
frequency, but by the HCLK frequency, which could be lowered by the AHB
prescaler. So, to recap, the core frequency is equal to
HAL_RCC_GetSysClockFreq()/AHB-prescaler.↩

68 The HAL_RCC_GetSysClockFreq() is defined to return an uint32_t.
This means that it could return wrong results with fractional values for the
HSE oscillator.↩

69 There is no need to enable the NMI exception, because it is
automatically enabled, and it cannot be disabled.↩
70 The figure is taken from the RM0368 application note from ST
(https://bit.ly/1Kq3SoE).↩

71 This is not entirely true, but it is ok to consider it true here.↩

72 The table is adapted from the one found in the
AN4013(http://bit.ly/1WAewd6) from ST, an application note dedicated to
STM32 timers that is best to keep in hand during this chapter.↩

73 With the term peripheral interconnection, we indicate the ability of
some peripherals to “trigger” other peripherals, or to fire some of their DMA
requests (for example, the TIM6 update event can trigger the DAC1
conversion). More about this topic in Chapter 13.↩

74 As said at the beginning of this chapter, STM32 timers are the only
peripherals that share the same implementation among all STM32 families.
This is almost true, except for TIM2 and TIM5 timers, which have a 32-bit
resolution in the majority of STM32 MCUs and 16-bit resolution in some
early STM32 MCUs. Moreover, some specific features may have a slightly
different implementation between some STM32 series (especially between
“older” STM32F1 microcontrollers and more recent STM32 ones). Always
consult the datasheet for your MCU before you plan to use dedicated features
provided by some timers.↩

75 The table was arranged in September 2021. STM32 MCUs evolve
almost day-by-day, so some things may be changed when you read this
chapter.↩

76 And eventually send me an email so that I can correct the table in next
releases of the book :-)↩

77 The TIM18 basic timer is only available in STM32F37x
microcontrollers.↩

78 The Period is used to fill the Auto-reload register (ARR) of the timer. I
do not know why ST engineers have decided to name it in this way, since
ARR is the register name used in all ST datasheets. This can lead to a lot of
confusion, especially when you are new to the CubeHAL, but unfortunately
there is nothing we can do.↩

79 The Update Event (UEV) is latched to the prescaler clock, and it is
automatically cleared on the next clock edge. Don’t confuse the UEV with the
Update Interrupt Flag (UIF), which must be cleared manually like every
other IRQ. UIF is set only when the corresponding interrupt is enabled. As
we will discover in Chapter 19, the UEV event, like all event flags set for
other peripherals, allows to wake up the MCU when it enters a low-power
mode using the WFE instruction.↩

80 This is an important distinction with other microcontroller architectures
(especially 8-bit ones) where timers need to be “rearmed” manually before
they can start counting again.↩

81 Owners of the Nucleo boards equipping F401 and F103 STM32 MCUs
will find a slightly different example using a general purpose timer.
However, concepts remain the same.↩

82 A really common mistake made by novices is to forget to start a timer, by
using one of the HAL_TIM_xxx_Start function provided by the CubeHAL. ↩

83 However this requires that the timer is enabled in interrupt mode, using
the HAL_TIM_Base_Start_IT() function.↩

84 Remember that even if the exception handling in a Cortex-M MCU has a
deterministic latency (Cortex-M3/4/7/33 cores serve an interrupt in 12 CPU
cycles, while Cortex-M0 does it in 15 cycles and Cortex-M0+ in 16 cycles)
it has a non-negligible cost, which requires several nanoseconds in “low-
speed” MCUs (for example, for an STM32F072 MCU running at 48MHz, an
interrupt is serviced in about 300ns). This cost has to be added to the
overhead introduced by the HAL during the interrupt management, as seen
before.↩

85 The figure is arranged from the one found in the
RM0368(https://bit.ly/1Kq3SoE) reference manual from ST.↩
86 In the ST documentation these modes are also called External Trigger
mode 1 and 2 (ETR1 and ETR2).↩

87 This HSI frequency is related to an STM32F072RB. In other STM32
MCUs the HSI speed is 16MHz. Please, consult the datasheet of your MCU
and arrange the math accordingly.↩

88 As we will see next, a timer can be configured to work in master and
slave mode at the same time.↩

89 This mode is available only in some STM32F3 MCUs.↩

90 As we will discover later, the master/slave mode of a timer is not
exclusively: a timer can be configured to work as a master and slave at the
same time.↩

91 Some STM32 microcontrollers, notably STM32F3 ones, provide two
independent trigger lines, named TRGO1 and TRGO2. This case is not
shown in this book.↩

92 Clearly, that prescaler value is referred to an STM32F072RB MCU
running at 48MHz. For your Nucleo, check the book examples for the right
prescaler setting.↩

93 Some general purpose timers (for example, TIM14) have less input
channels and hence a simplified input stage structure. Refer to the reference
manual for your MCU to know the exact structure of the timer you are going
to use.↩

94 The timer clock frequency is independent from the way the timer works
(in this case, input capture mode). As seen in the previous paragraphs, the
timer clock depends on the bus frequency or the external clock source and on
the related prescaler settings.↩

95 CCR is acronym for Capture Compare Register and the x is the channel
number.↩
96 The output compare modes are actually eight, but two of them are related
to PWM output, and they will be analyzed in the next paragraph.↩

97 This mode in CubeMX is called Frozen mode.↩

98 Please, ensure that the GPIO speed is configured so that the allowed
maximum switching frequency is in the same range of the desired timer
switching frequency.↩

99 However, keep in mind that the PWM as modulation technique is not
limited to digital electronics, but it originates in the “analog era” when it was
used to modulate an audio wave on a carrier frequency.↩

100 Unfortunately, not all Nucleo boards have the LD2 LED connected to a
timer channel (this depends on the fact that the pinout of LQFP-64 STM32
microcontrollers is not perfectly compatible). Only seven of them have this
feature. Owners of other Nucleo boards have to rearrange the example using
an external LED.↩

101 The maximum frequency of timers in an STM32F401RE MCU, when
clocked from the APB1 bus, is 84MHz.↩

102 When dealing with filters to smooth an output wave it is more
convenient to consider the effects on the output voltage than the response in
frequency of the filter. However, the math under the transfer function of a
filter is outside the scope of this book. If interested, this on-line
calculator(https://bit.ly/22breq2) allows to evaluate the         output given a
      , the PWM frequency and the R and C values.↩

103 Here, I have used a 100ohm resistor an a 10µF capacitor, which give a
cut-off frequency of ~159Hz and a        equal to 0.08V.↩

104 ED is acronyms for Edge Detector and it is an internal filtered timer
input enabled when only one of the three inputs in XOR is HIGH.↩
105 Remember that the SysTick_IRQn is an exception and not an interrupt,
even if it is common to refer to it as interrupt. This means that we cannot use
the HAL_NVIC_EnableIRQ() function to enable it. ↩

106 At the time of writing this chapter, the ADC provided by
STM32F37/38xx and STM32H7 series is the only notably exception to this
rule, since they provide a more accurate 16-bit ADC with Sigma-Delta(Σ-Δ)
modulator. This type of ADC will not be covered in this book. ST provides
the AN4207 to cover this topic. However, the HAL routines to use it have the
same organization.↩

107 Figure 12.1 is a simplified representation of the ADC. Since the ADC
implementation can differ a lot among the several STM32 families, here we
are going to consider a simplified view that clearly describes how the ADC
unit is designed.↩

108 The equivalent application note for the STM32F37x/38x series is the
AN4207(https://bit.ly/3AXmbxj).↩

109 The ADC_InitTypeDef struct slightly differs from the one defined in
CubeF0 and CubeL0 HALs. This because the ADC in those families does not
provide the ability to define custom input sampling sequences (by assigning
rank values). Moreover, the ADC in those families provide the ability to
perform oversampling of the input signal, and in CubeL0 HAL it is possible
to enable dedicated low-power features offered by the ADC in those MCUs.
For more information, refer to the CubeHAL source code.↩

110 This is not possible in STM32F1 MCUs.↩

111 STM32 internal temperature sensors are factory calibrated during the
IC production. Two temperatures are usually sampled at 30°C and 110°C.
They are called TS_CAL1 and TS_CAL2 respectively. The detected
temperatures are stored inside the non-volatile system memory. The exact
memory address is reported in the specific datasheet. Using this data, it is
possible to perform a linearization of the detected temperatures, so that the
error is leaded back in the typical accuracy value of 1°C. ST provides an
application note dedicated to this topic: the AN3964(https://bit.ly/1XfbuO6).
However, keep in mind that the internal temperature sensor measures the
temperature of the IC (and therefore of the PCB). According to the specific
STM32 family, the MCU running frequency, operations performed,
peripherals enabled, power section and so on, the detected temperature can
be much higher than the effective ambient temperature. For example, this
author has verified that an STM32F7 MCU running at 200MHz has a working
temperature of about ~45°C, at a room temperature of 20°C.↩

112 Please, take note that at the time of writing this chapter - September
2021 - CubeMX does not allow to set the maximum ADC frequency to the
half of the PCLK2 frequency, claiming that this is not possible in F401RE
P/N. This appears not true to this author, because it was perfectly possible in
older CubeMX and, at the same time, the official ST datasheet clearly states
that the ADC is able to run at the half of the clock speed of PCLK2.↩

113 That number comes from the fact that the ADCCLK interface, running at
48MHz, performs 48 cycles every 1μs. So, 480 cycles divided for 48 cycles/
μs gives 10μs.↩

114 The HAL_ADC module also provides the
HAL_ADC_ConvHalfCpltCallback() callback called when half of the scan
conversion sequence is completed. ↩

115 In some STM32 MCUs it is also required to explicitly enable the
overrun detection by setting the hadc.Init.Overrun to
ADC_OVR_DATA_OVERWRITTEN. Consult the HAL source code for the MCU
family you are considering.↩

116 Please, take note that it is important to configure the timer’s TRGO
output mode by using the HAL_TIMEx_MasterConfigSynchronization()
routine even if the timer does not work in master mode. This is a source of
confusion for novice users, and I have to admit that that is a little bit counter-
intuitive.↩

117 ST provides the AN2668(https://bit.ly/25lJoqx) dedicated to this
topic.↩
118 Although there exist applications where I²C and SPI protocols are used
to exchange messages over external wires (usually with a length around the
meter), these specifications were not designed to guarantee the robustness of
communication over potentially noisy mediums. For this reason, their
application is limited to the single PCB.↩

119 The I²C can be also a multi-master protocol, meaning that two or more
masters can exist on the same bus, but only one master at a time can take the
bus control and it is up to masters to arbitrate the access to the bus. In
practice, it is rare to use the I²C in multi-master mode in embedded systems.
This book does not cover the multi-master mode.↩

120 You still have to pay royalties to NXP if you want to receive an official
and licensed I²C address pool for your devices, but I think that this not the
case of readers of this book.↩

121 This constitutes one of the most practical limits of the I²C protocol. In
fact, IC manufacturers rarely dedicate enough pins to configure the full slave
address used on a given board (no more than three pins are dedicated to this
feature, if you are lucky, giving only eight choices of slave addresses). When
designing a board with several I²C devices, pay attention to their address and
in case of collision you will need to use two or more I²C peripherals to drive
them. ↩

122 There exist ICs communicating only at lower speeds, but nowadays are
uncommon.↩

123 Please, take note that here we are generically talking about receiver
and transmitter because ACK/NACK bit can be set by both the master and
the slave.↩

124 That values come from the fact that 64Kbits are equal to 65536 bits,
but every memory location is 8-bit wide, so 65536/8 = 8196 = 0x2000.
Since the memory locations starts from 0, then the last one has the 0x1FFF
address.↩
125 The 24LCxx EEPROM memories are designed so that they work in the
same way even if we end the transaction by issuing a STOP condition, and
then we immediately start a new one in read mode. This degree of flexibility
we will allow us to build the first example of this chapter, as we will see in
a while.↩

126 Unfortunately, when I started designing this example, I thought that it
were possible to use just one board, connecting the pins associated with an
I²C peripheral to those ones of another I²C peripheral (for example, I2C1
pins directly connected to the I2C3 pins). But, after a lot of struggling, I
reached to the conclusion that I²C peripherals in an STM32 are not “truly
asynchronous” and it is not possible to use two I²C peripherals concurrently.
So, to run this examples you will need two Nucleo boards, or just one
Nucleo and another development kit: in this case, you need to rearrange the
master part accordingly.↩

127 Motorola was a pioneer company in the semiconductor industry that
has been split in several sub-companies over the years. The semiconductor
division of Motorola flowed into ON Semiconductor, while the
microcontrollers division became Freescale Semiconductor. This last one
was acquired by NXP in 2015. ↩

128 For the sake of completeness, we have to say that this is not the exact
reason why it is possible to have devices with different communication
speeds on the same bus. The main reason is due to the fact that slave I/Os are
implemented with tri-state I/Os, that is they are placed in high-impedance
state (disconnected) when the SS line is not asserted LOW. ↩

129 8-bit data transmissions are the rule, but some slave devices support
even 16-bit ones.↩

130 Some fields have been omitted for simplicity. Refer to the CubeHAL
source code for the exact definition of the SPI_HandleTypeDef struct.↩

131 The checksum is often called the CRC. This is not entirely correct,
because the CRC is a specific error-detecting method, which uses a well-
characterized algorithm plus a checksum sequence of bits to detect if a
message is corrupted. However, it is quite common to refer to the checksum
as the CRC, or the CRC code.↩

132 An excellent dissertation of CRC algorithms is represented by this on-
line document by Ross N. Williams (http://www.zlib.net/crc_v3.txt)↩

133 Instead, in normal algebra the addition would be equal to
                    .↩

134 As we will see next, STM32F0/F3/F7/L0/L4 MCUs use a slightly
different and powerful CRC peripheral not limited to the CRC-32
polynomial.↩

135 This is an important distinction compared to algorithms implemented in
several libraries and on-line calculators, which usually perform CRC
computation by splitting the word in sub-bytes. Refer to this
post(http://bit.ly/29303sh) and this other one(http://bit.ly/293067u) on the
official ST forum by the clive1 user (the most active and experienced user on
STM32 related sub-forum). ↩

136 This author prefers the less famous Smith’s Law, which states: Murphy
was an optimist.↩

137 There exist really low-cost MCUs that do not provide this feature, or
which implement it in an unreliable way, requiring to adopt external and
dedicated ICs. ↩

138 In Chapter 19 about power management, we will see how to address
this limitation.↩

139 In the next chapter we will see that STM32 MCUs with high pin count
provide several independent power domains. The RTC belongs to the VBAT
domain, that is the set of all peripherals that are powered through the VBAT
pin. This domain is especially designed to be tied to a battery, and all
peripherals belonging to this domain keep working even when the main
power, and hence the MCU core, is OFF. ↩
140 The figure is taken from the AN3371 from ST(http://bit.ly/2fcR1uE).↩

Advanced topics
1 As we will discover next, in some really “deep” sleep modes the MCU
can be woken up only by few peripherals, which always include the RTC.↩

2 The I²C peripheral consumes up to 720µA in an “old” STM32F103
running at its maximum clock speed. This might seem not that much for a
device powered from the mains, but it has a dramatic impact on a battery-
powered device.↩

3 In this mode, the core of an STM32L4 MCU consumes about 1.1µA. ↩

4 Official ARM documentation talks about active mode, which is opposed
to the sleep one used to indicate a non-running core. However, since this
book is all about STM32 microcontrollers, and since the power scheme of a
Cortex-M MCU is left to the specific vendor implementation, we will use in
this book the term run mode, which is what ST uses to indicate a CPU
actively running.↩

5 We will discover in that chapter that one possible strategy consists in
placing the MCU in sleep mode when the idle thread is scheduled. The idle
thread is that thread executed by an RTOS when all other threads are “un-
runnable”. This clearly means that the MCU has nothing relevant to do, and it
can be placed in sleep mode safely.↩

6 Clearly, we are talking about the power consumption of the MCU core and
all integrated peripherals. The power consumption of the overall board is
determined by other things that we will not address here.↩

7 This register is internal to the core and not accessible to the user.↩

8 Disabling interrupt on a priority basis is only applicable to Cortex-
M3/4/7 based MCUs.↩
9 As we will discover next, STM32 microcontroller can be powered by a
variable voltage source ranging from 2.0V to 3.6V (some of them allow to be
powered even down to 1.62V). This voltage source is also called VDD
domain and all components inside the MCU powered from this source are
said to be part of the VDD domain. However, the internal MCU core and
some other peripherals are powered by a dedicated 1.8V (or even 1.0V in
some STM32L MCUs) internal voltage regulator. This defines the 1.8V
domain or VCORE domain. The low-voltage internal regulator can be
independently turned OFF. More about this later.↩

10 It is important to remark that the diagram in Figure 19.3 is just a scheme.
Some STM32F MCUs, especially those providing a TFT-LCD controller or
other communication interfaces like the Ethernet, introduce other power
source domains. In the same way, STM32 MCUs with lower pin count
(especially those ones with less than 32 pins) have a simplified power
distribution network. However, the concepts illustrated here remain valid.↩

11 Backup registers are a dedicated memory area, with a typical size of
4Kb, that is powered by a different power source usually connected to a
battery or a super-capacitor. This is used to store volatile data that remains
valid even when the MCU is powered OFF, either if the whole device is
turned OFF or the MCU is placed in standby mode.↩

12 Don’t forget that in sleep mode only the CPU clock is turned OFF, while
other peripherals remain active. So, the speed of the HCLK clock source
continues to affect the overall power consumption.↩

13 The figure is taken from the ST AN4365(https://bit.ly/1XzmF2o)
application note.↩

14 For other Nucleo boards refer to the book examples.↩

15 ST claims in its datasheet that the VBAT pin can charge a battery. While
this is possible in theory, consider that the integrated “charger” is nothing
more than a current-limiting resistor connected to the VDD. This means that
the charger does not implement any charging algorithm necessary to avoid
blowing modern batteries like LiPo or NIMH ones. So, unless you decide to
build your own battery charger by implementing adequate charging policies
in the firmware, consider that there exists a lot of ICs dedicated to this stuff
that cost few cents, especially if you look to the Chinese industry.↩

16 The power consumption values reported in Figure 19.7 refer to the
STM32L562 series with integrated SMPS.↩

17 The Figure 19.8 is taken from this ST official
document(https://bit.ly/3FwfEfA). ST also provides a useful application
note, the AN4746(https://bit.ly/3FAKKCy), about power consumption
optimization in STM32L4 MCUs.↩

18 The HAL calls this mode stop0, and this achieved by calling the
HAL_PWREx_EnterSTOP0Mode() function.↩

19 Debugging during the sleep mode is not available in STM32F0
microcontrollers and hence the corresponding HAL function is not provided
by the HAL.↩

20 Remember that, as we will see next, the Cortex-M architecture defines
the 0x0000 0000 address as the memory location where starting to place
MSP and vector table. This means that the flash starting address (0x0800
0000) is aliased to 0x0000 0000.↩

21 ELF is acronym for Executable and Linkable Format and it is a
common standard file format for executable files, object code, shared
libraries, and core dumps. It is the typical file format of UNIX like systems
(Linux and MacOS use this format too) and ARM based environments. ↩

22 It is important to underline that an object file contains much more
sections. The most of them are related to debugging, and contain relevant
information like the original source code, all the symbols contained in the
source file (even those that have been optimized by the compiler), and so on.
However, for the purposes of this discussion, it is better to leave them out.↩

23 Take in account that, from the compiler point of view, the file extension
is just a convention.↩
24 Those of you that want to deepen this matter can take a look at the
readelf tool provided in the GCC ARM tool-chain.↩

25 Here, again, the story is more complex. First of all, the linker could
assemble other pieces from several external statically linked libraries (those
ending with .a). These libraries, also known as archive files, are nothing
more than a merge of several relocatable files. During the linking process,
only those program structures used in our application will be merged with
the final firmware. Another important aspect to remark is that this process is
essentially the same for every microprocessor platform (like the x86 and so
on), and it is also called static linking. More powerful architectures face an
advanced linking process, also known as dynamic linking, which postpones
the linking when the program will be loaded in the OS process. This allows
to dramatically reduce the size of executables, and to update the dependency
libraries without recompiling the whole application. In dynamic linking
libraries are called shared objects (or shared libraries, or DLL in
Windows), and in modern Operating Systems it is possible to share the same
.text section from these libraries among the processes that use them by
using mmap() or similar system calls. This allows reducing disk space as
well the SRAM occupation of processes (think to the tons of system libraries
that should be “replicated” among the several processes running on a modern
PC). ↩

26 This code is designed to work with the Nucleo-F401RE. Refer to the
book examples for the other Nucleo boards. ↩

27 The ENTRY() directive is meaningless in embedded applications, where
the actual entry point corresponds to the handler of the Reset exception.
However, it may be informative for debuggers and simulators, and for this
reason you will find it in ST official LD linker scripts.↩

28 Ok, coding it in assembly will allow you to save additional space, but
this book is not for masochists ;-D↩

29 When you run the command, you will see much more sections all related
to debugging. Here you will not see them because the debug information has
been “stripped” from the file using the arm-none-eabi-strip command.↩
30 The Frame Pointer is a special pointer to separate the function
parameters by the local variables. More details about this register can be
found here(https://bit.ly/1ngLrop).↩

31 It is important to clarify that the above assembly code is generated with
all optimizations disabled.↩

32 Please, take note that the order of sections inside a linker script reflects
their order in memory. If we have two sections, named A and B, both loaded
in SRAM, if section A is defined before than B, then it will be placed in
SRAM before then B.↩

33 There are other better alternatives, however. We will explore them in the
next chapter.↩

34 Here, we may use a different way to signal the heap overflow. For
example, a global error() function could be called, and take the appropriate
actions there. However, this is often a programming style, so feel free to
arrange that code at your needs. ↩

35 The figure has been arranged from the one contained in the AN4296 from
ST(https://bit.ly/1QSctkT).↩

36 Some STM32 MCUs provide two SRAM memories, with one of these
allowing 0-wait access. Always consult the datasheet for your MCU.↩

37 Keep in mind that to reach a full parallel access to the SRAM, no other
masters (e.g., the DMA) must contend the access to the SRAM through the
BusMatrix.↩

38 The memory configuration refers to a Nucleo-F303 that, together with
the Nucleo-G474, provides the CCM memory.↩

39 Remember that Cortex-M0/0+ cores are only able to perform word-
aligned access.↩
40 This is especially true for Cortex-A microprocessors or FPGAs, where
the non-volatile memory is provided by external flash memories connected to
the CPU through dedicated bus lines.↩

41 The table is extracted from the ST RM0360 reference manual
(https://bit.ly/1GfS3iC)↩

42 Several STM32 MCUs from the STM32L-series provide a dedicated
and true EEPROM memory, like in other low-cost 8-bit microcontrollers (for
example, ATMEL AVR microcontrollers).↩

43 However, keep in mind that there exists companies able to bypass read-
protection using advanced hardware techniques (this usually involves the
usage of lasers that overwrite the read-protection bits inside the Option
Bytes region - it is not inexpensive, but it is possible ;-) )↩

44 STM32L4-series provides a similar feature named fast program/erase
mode. It is related to both the VDD and the clock speed. It allows to
erase/program the flash on a double word granularity. Consult the reference
manual for your MCU for more about this.↩

45 Obviously, the flash must be unlocked before we can modify it.↩

46 In some STM32 MCUs, like the STM32L0-series, a bus fault may occur
if we try to access the flash memory while a half-page program operation is
ongoing. For more information, consult the reference manual for the MCU
you are considering.↩

47 The exact number of pipeline stages depend on the specific Cortex-M
core.↩

48 Talking about “speed” in this context is improper because we should talk
about the “latency” needed to perform a machine operation. This latency is
essentially formed by the time needed by the CPU to decode and execute a
machine instruction, plus the time needed by the flash controller to retrieve
the given instruction from the NVM memory. However, here we are
interested to the fact that these two “devices” (the CPU and the flash memory
with its controller) may need different amount of time to carry out their
activities.↩

49 The figure is taken from the AN4667 from ST(https://bit.ly/29gmp61).↩

50 The figure is taken from the AN4667 from ST(https://bit.ly/29gmp61).↩

51 The figure is taken from the AN4667 from ST(https://bit.ly/29gmp61).↩

52 The figure is taken from the AN4667 from ST(https://bit.ly/29gmp61).↩

53 For more information about these buses, refer to the Chapter 9.↩

54 Depending on the package used, in some STM32 MCUs the BOOT1 pin
is absent, and it is replaced by a special bit, called nBOOT1, inside the
option bytes region. Consult the reference manual for your MCU for more
about this. In some other STM32 families, like the STM32F7, the
functionality of the BOOT1 pin is completely replaced by two dedicated
option bytes. Finally, in those MCUs providing two boot pins, BOOT0 is
most of the times a dedicated pin used exclusively to select boot origin,
while BOOT1 is shared with a GPIO pin. Once BOOT1 has been sampled,
the corresponding GPIO pin is freed and can be used for other purposes.
However, there exist exceptions in those MCUs with less than 36 pins where
even BOOT0 pin is treated as input GPIO once sampled during the first
clock cycles (for example, the STM32L011K4T is one of these).↩

55 It is important to clarify that the CPU will not restart a reset sequence,
invoking the handler of the Reset exception once the memory has been
remapped using the SYSCFG->MEMRMP register. It will be your responsibility
to invoke that exception handler, and to ensure that the CPU is placed to the
initial conditions that the target firmware expects to find (e.g., all peripherals
disabled, and so on). ↩

56 For those of you wondering how to upload the firmware on a board
without the debug port, and without using the integrated bootloader, it could
be useful to know that ST can ship to you MCUs with your firmware already
pre-programmed during MCU production. This possibility is offered for
quite large orders (as far as I know lots with more than 10.000pcs). Ask to
your sales representative for more about this. Finally, there exists specialized
companies that can do this job for you, by performing even additional
operations such as re-reeling service.↩

57 Figure 4 in Chapter 1 gives you an idea of the System memory position
inside the Cortex-M 4GB address space.↩

58 This is not a secondary feature, since there exist different releases of
STM32 bootloaders, and some of them have non negligible differences.↩

59 The above address, 0x1FFF 0000, coincides with the starting address of
System Memory in an STM32F401RE MCU; consult the reference manual
for your MCU for the exact value). ↩

60 Probably the physical remap is not strictly needed, since the bootloader
seems to work well the same.↩

61 In real-life applications, especially if you use a contract manufacturer to
produce your boards, you may need a more secure bootloader and a more
articulated production environment. ST provides a complete extension
package, named X-CUBE-SBSFU, which consists a of complete solution to
handle secure bootloader, secure firmware upgrade and distribution, keys
management and their distributions.↩

62 Clearly, the MCU pins must be configured so that the flash memory is the
default boot source. ↩

63 The MCU ID is different from the CPU ID. The former identifies the
STM32 family and chip type (for example, 0x433 identifies the
STM32F401RE MCU). The latter is a unique ID that identifies that specific
MCU, and it is impossible (or at least really hard) that exist two STM32
microcontrollers with the same CPU ID. ↩

64 The aes_enc_dec() function is taken from a library made by Eric
Peeters, a TI employee. It can be downloaded from the TI
website(http://www.ti.com/tool/AES-128) and its license allows to use it
freely. ST provides a complete cryptographic library for the STM32
platform, which is also compatible with the Cube framework
(https://bit.ly/29zWN81). This library can also take advantage of those
STM32 MCUs providing a dedicated hardware crypto unit. However, the
license of this library prevents this author from shipping the library with the
examples in this book.↩

65 pycryptodome is a collection of both secure hash functions (such as
SHA256 and RIPEMD160), and various encryption algorithms (AES, DES,
RSA, etc.). It is the most widespread cryptographic library for Python.
IntelHex is a small library that allows to easily manipulate Intel HEX files.
It is developed by Alexander Belchenko and distributed under the BSD
license. ↩

66 Some RTOSes, like FreeRTOS, use the term task to indicate an
independent execution stream contending the CPU with other tasks. However,
this author considers this terminology not appropriate. Traditionally, in
general purpose Operating Systems, multitasking is a method by which
multiple tasks, also known as processes, share common hardware resources
(mainly the CPU and the RAM). With a multitasking OS, such as Linux, you
can simultaneously run multiple applications. Multitasking refers to the
ability of the OS to quickly switch between each computing task to give the
impression that different applications are executing multiple actions
simultaneously. A process has one relevant characteristic: its memory space
is physically insulated from other processes, thanks to features offered by the
Memory Management Unit (MMU) inside the CPU. Multithreading extends
the idea of multitasking into single processes, so that you can subdivide
specific operations within a single application into individual threads. Each
thread could run in parallel. The important trait of threads it that they share
the same memory address space. True embedded architectures, like the
STM32 are, do not provide a MMU (only a features-limited Memory
Protection Unit - MPU - is available in some of them). The absence of this
unit does not allow to have separated address spaces, since it is impossible
to alias physical addresses to logical ones. This means that they can carry out
just one single application, which can be eventually split in several threads
sharing the same memory address space. For this reason, we will talk about
threads in this book, even if sometimes we will use the word “task” when
talking about some FreeRTOS APIs or to indicate an activity of the firmware
in general terms.↩

67 Experienced user will point out that it is not correct to talk about
cooperative scheduling in this context for two fundamental reasons: the
execution order of tasks is fixed (the “schedule” is computed by the
programmer during the firmware development) and each routine is not able
to save its execution context before leaving, that is the stack frame of the
doOperationX() routine is destroyed when it returns. As we will see in a
while, co-routines are a generalization of subroutines in non-preemptive
multitasking systems.↩

68 With high baudrates, polling the UART is certainly not correct at all, but
here we are interested to the point.↩

69 A local and static variable would have the same effect, however without
changing the concept.↩

70 Which involves the use of the C setjmp() and longjmp() functions.↩

71 In this paragraph, and only in this one, the term task and thread will be
used indiscriminately.↩

72 Those values of quantum time are indicative, since the exact duration of
a quantum is affected by a lot of things. Not last, the overhead connected with
a context switch, which is non-negligible. Moreover, here we are assuming
that tasks have all the same priority, which usually is not true especially in
embedded systems.↩

73 This is not true at all, since before a task is preempted several other
things take place. However, explaining into details these aspects is outside
the scope of this book. Refer to Joseph Yiu books if interested in deepening
how context switch is performed on Cortex-M based microcontrollers.↩

74 This does not mean that using an RTOS we can write bad code without
impacting on the overall performances. This only means that, a true
preemptive scheduler can guarantee a higher multiprogramming degree,
ensuring that all threads have the same CPU time-slice. Unless we mess with
task priorities, as we will see later.↩

75 However, this could not correspond to what an RTOS does. The story
here is more complex, and it is related to the specific hardware architectures
and to the way interrupts are prioritized. During the execution of an interrupt
handler, another interrupt with a higher priority could suspend the execution
of the current interrupt, as seen in Chapter 7. But when this happens, the CPU
cannot switch to the thread mode (which is the regular mode when the
normal code is executed) by performing the task switch without prior exiting
from all interrupts (which run in the handler mode - a special mode provided
by Cortex-M core during the exception handling). This means that if the
SysTick IRQ takes place while another IRQ is active, the SysTick exception
handler cannot perform the context switch (that is to pass the control to
another task running in thread mode), because another code running in
handler mode has been preempted and needs to complete its activities.
Usually this is solved by deferring the effective context switch operation to
the PendSV Handler, which is an exception configured to run at the lowest
priority. However, this is just one way to implement the context switch. If
interested in deepening this topic, you have to consult the source code or the
documentation of your RTOS.↩

76 However, that file in the FreeRTOS source tree is just a template. The
actual file used by CubeMX to configure FreeRTOS is the
Core/Inc/FreeRTOSConfig.h one.↩

77 This part of FreeRTOS is considered separated from the core FreeRTOS
source three, and it is said to implement the port layer of FreeRTOS.↩

78 In concurrent programming, a deadlock is a situation in which two or
more concurrent execution streams are each waiting for the other to finish,
and thus neither ever does. Incur in deadlock is anything but difficult, and all
programmers soon or later will encounter this hard-to-debug event. ↩

79 For the sake of completeness, this function does not anything relevant
here, since there is no kernel initialization procedure in FreeRTOS, which
performs this job in the vTaskStartScheduler() routine (wrapped by the
CMSIS-RTOS2 osKernelStart() routine). ↩

80 FreeRTOS provides dedicated scheduling policies for multi-core
embedded architectures, which are becoming more and more popular in
recent years. This topic will be covered in a future chapter. ↩

81 By default, the Core/Inc/FreeRTOSConfig.h file does not contain the
definition of the configUSE_TIME_SLICING macro. It is so automatically
defined and set to 1 by FreeRTOS in the
Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/include/FreeRTOS. file.↩

82 In concurrent programming, the starvation happens when a thread is
perpetually denied necessary resources to process its work. Starvation
usually, it is caused by a bad synchronization among threads, but even by a
wrong priority allocation scheme. The starvation is an unwanted condition
that no programmer would want never to reach, and sometimes to identify its
origin can be a nightmare.↩

83 With one notable exception represented by the heap_3.c allocator, as
we will see soon.↩

84 You can give a look to the _reent struct here.↩

85 A complete list of non-reentrant functions is available here.↩

86 The term out-of-the-box means the memory layout of a standard
application as generated by CubeMX in the STM32CubeIDE 1.8.0. Things
may change if you have a newer version of the IDE. So, please check before
taking the information in this paragraph as pure gold.↩

87 Dave provides the possibility to use malloc() in an ISR context
because some ST libraries (notably the USB Device Stack) use malloc() in
code called in an ISR. The reason why this happens is because, as we will
see in the chapter dedicated to USB peripheral, the majority of USB
operations are handled by the stack in a context of a ISR. ↩
88 The CMSIS-RTOS2 use the term message queues to indicate what
usually are simply called queues. As we will see in a while, this also
impacts on the API (all structures and functions have the prefix osMessage).
However, in the remaining part of this chapter, we will simply refer to them
as queues.↩

89 The osMessageQueuePut() and osMessageQueueGet() can return
other status codes, according to if they are called from a thread or an ISR.
For more information, consult the official CMSIS-RTOS2 specification
(https://bit.ly/3tND6Se).↩

90 In the CMSIS-RTOS2 terminology, a resource accessed by a counting
semaphore is called token. For this reason, we say that a semaphore allows
to acquire/release tokens.↩

91 However, different from other Operating Systems, FreeRTOS is not
implemented to check that only the thread that has acquired the mutex can
release it.↩

92 The FreeRTOS daemon task is also called the timer service task
because it is the thread that handles the execution of timer’s callback
routines, which we will analyze later.↩

93 If you read the official FreeRTOS documentation, you can see that the
macro used to setup the maximum interruptible priority level is
configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY. However, being FreeRTOS
portable among several silicon vendors, the priority level specified with that
macro is the exact value of the IPR register, that accepts only the upper 4 bits
in STM32 MCUs (for example, a priority equal to 0x2 must be specified as
0x20). ST engineers have defined the macro
configLIBRARY_MAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY so that we can
specify the priority level according to the HAL convention (in LSB form),
while the configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY is defined in the
following way: #define configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY (
configLIBRARY_MAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY << (8 -
configPRIO_BITS) )↩
94 This is behavior is enabled when the scheduling policy is the prioritized
preemptive scheduling with time slicing, according to Table 23.2.↩

95 As we will discover later, under certain circumstances we can safely
stop incrementing the global tick counter. This can be done when we are not
going to use software timers and timeouts: if all threads are blocked or
suspended indefinitely, then it is safe to completely turn OFF the timebase
generator.↩

96 In Cortex-M3/4 ports this function is called
vPortSetupTimerInterrupt().↩

97 This is a user-defined parameter that represents a further delay before to
start the tick suppression procedure. Since this procedure is computationally
intensive, and it may introduce minor shifts in the global tick count, we can
programmatically decide to wait at least n consecutive ticks before starting
the procedure.↩

98 This happens because this routine is called within an IRQ with the
lowest possible priority, as seen before. So, a more privileged IRQ may
resume the execution of another blocked task.↩

99 Please, take note that it is not sufficient we do not use timers in our code.
The macro configUSE_TIMERS in FreeRTOSConfig.h must be set to 0,
otherwise the eTaskConfirmSleepModeStatus() never return the
eNoTasksWaitingTimeout value.↩

100 Deleted threads usually persist in memory for a short time. When a
thread is marked for deletion, it is effectively moved out from the system by
the idle thread.↩

101 FPv4-SP-D16 means that the MCU implements a floating-point unit
conforming to the VFPv4-D16 architecture, single precision (SP), while
FPv5-SP-D16 refers to the VFPv5-D16 architecture, single precision (SP).
↩
102 Clearly, without the RTOS kernel-aware debugging the stack trace most
likely will provide us misleading information if we are using an RTOS.↩

103 As C programmers, we are all “high level programmers”, whether you
believe it or not.↩

104 This is not entirely true, because CPU could execute code placed in
SRAM as well as in other external memories. But it is ok to consider it true
here.↩

105 It is important to underline that the same ARM calling convention
applies to Cortex-A based microprocessors, which have all the features to
handle dynamic linking with high-level OSes like Linux and Windows.↩

106 Here the story is a little bit more complex. Depending on the usage of
an RTOS, there could be “multiple” stacks at the same time: a Main Stack or
a stack specific for the single thread, called Process Stack. This topic is
outside the scope of this book. For more information about it, refer to the
excellent book by Joseph Yiu(http://amzn.to/1P5sZwq) about Cortex-M
architectures.↩

107 Please, take note that the core_registers parameter is a pointer, so
the R0 register will contain the memory location (a 32-bit integer) where the
core registers have been saved.↩

108 Clearly, that function must be included in the binary image, that is it
must be a function used in the firmware code.↩

109 By default, CubeMX shows the PA14 pin, which corresponds to the
Serial Wire Debug Clock, as TCK and the PA13 pin, which corresponds to
the Serial Wire Debug I/O, as TMS. These acronyms come from the JTAG
specification that, as said before, uses 4+1 pins to establish a debug
connection with the target MCU. These pins are: Test Data In (TDI), Test
Data Out (TDO), Test Clock (TCK), Test Mode Select (TMS) and Test
Reset (TRST) - optional.↩
110 At the time of writing this chapter February 2022, SEGGER does not
provide a tool to convert an ST-LINK V3 debug adapter to a SEGGER J-
LINK. ↩

111 Unfortunately, at the time of writing this chapter, the upgrade tool is
only available for the Windows OS. ↩

112 Please, take note that the license of this “free” upgrade to the ST-LINK
interface prevents you from using it to debug custom and commercial
devices. Look at the SEGGER website for the complete list of limitations.↩

113 For the sake of completeness, we have to say that the same author made
an even smaller version of the FatFs library, named Petit
FatFs(https://bit.ly/2drLLAa), which is best suitable for 8-bit MCUs. It
essentially implements a subset of the main FatFs library.↩

114 In STM32F7 MCUs the SDIO peripheral is called SDMMC.↩

115 However, the implementation of this functionality is not mandatory for
SD manufacturers. There exist several SD cards on the market that do not
implement the SPI specification or, at least, they do not implement it
literally.↩

116 The full FatFS API is documented on the Chan’s website↩

117 The mounting of a disk is an operation performed by the filesystem
driver that essentially consists in gathering all the logical information
associated to a physical drive or a part of it (number of partitions, partition
dimension, dimension of clusters, number of clusters and so on). It is
impossible to use any filesystem primitive (directories, files, etc.) before
mounting it.↩

118 Tensilica is a company that, like ARM, design IP cores that are later
implemented by silicon manufacturers. It is currently owned by Cadence, the
same company that designs the Allegro CAD.↩
119 A socket in networking is an abstraction over the complex TCP/IP
stack. It is just a handle that allows to send a stream of bytes from a machine
to another, without dealing with the complex underlying protocol (unless you
need to perform advanced operations). ↩

120 The figure is taken from the WIZnet website(https://bit.ly/2dxjblH). ↩

121 A RAW socket is a socket that allows to exchange packets using
directly the IP protocol and without any protocol-specific transport layer
(that is, TCP or UDP). ↩

122 It is possible to reduce the size of the two buffers, since the HTTP
library is able to split the whole HTTP stream in smaller chunks, but this
will increase the transfer time.↩

123 The ioLibrary_Driver shipped with this chapter’s example is not the
official library provided by WIZnet. This author made several modifications
to the HTTP module to improve its reliability, performances and flexibility.
For example, this modified version is able to serve content stored on an SD
card using the FatFs module or on the developer’s PC using ARM
semihosting. ↩

124 The source code presented here is related to the Nucleo-F401RE
board.↩

125 The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) is a standardized protocol
used to interface “server applications” that processes requests coming from
clients dynamically. Historically, CGIs were introduced to generate web
content dynamically. Nowadays, this form of server processing in web
applications has been superseded by a multitude of web frameworks, built
using dynamic and more powerful scripting languages like PHP, Python and
Ruby. ↩

126 The early group was founded by Compaq, DEC, IBM, Intel, Microsoft,
NEC, and Nortel.↩
127 Please take note that, from now on, with the term “USB” we are
referring to the USB 2.0 protocol, unless different stated.↩

128 The reason for the introduction of the NYET handshake packet in USB
2.0 were bandwidth utilization efficiency considerations. If a device
responds with a NYET, the host knows that the device will very likely NAK
the next OUT transaction which means that the whole frame time the data is
being transmitted is wasted: The exact same data will have to be sent again.
That’s why NAKing an OUT transaction wastes a lot of frame time since the
OUT transaction occupies the bus without purpose and it competes with
other transactions/devices as well, taking frame time from them. Imagine the
protocol without the NYET handshake: The host would have to send the
same whole block of data (i.e., up to 512 bytes for bulk endpoints) every
time the device NAKs just to inquiry if the device is ready. If the host gets a
NYET instead, it will start PINGing the device, asking if the device is ready
to receive more data. A PING transaction is very short compared to a large
data OUT transaction. Hence, if the device NAKs the PING, the host can use
the rest of the frame for other transactions instead which leads to better
utilization of the bus.↩

129 This topic is related to audio/video transmission over USB. For a
detailed description of the three possible synchronization types, please refer
to this thread. ↩

130 Several files in the Drivers/STM32XXxx_HAL_Driver/Src folder
was omitted to simplify the image.↩

131 The diagram has been taken from this ST webpage. ↩

132 Please, take note that the enumeration sequence shown in Figure 15 is
captured while connecting a USB Virtual COM Port device to a MacOS 11.x.
The enumeration could slightly change in Windows.↩

133 The standard USB CDC class specification can be found in the USB-IF
website↩
134 According to USB specification, a device can have multiple interfaces,
and so multiple interface descriptors. A USB device with multiple interfaces
that perform different functions is called a composite device. An example is
a keyboard with an integrated smart card reader. In this case you have a
single USB device with two interfaces. One interface is for the smart card
reader (implementing the CCID class) and another interface is for the
keyboard (implementing the HID class). Multiple interfaces can be active at
the same time.↩

135 This field may contain additional information particularly useful to
debug devices in field. For example, it is useful to store here also the FW
version, so that it is easy to keep track of given behaviors of the FW during
support sessions. The same value may be useful to drive specific operations
at application level. ↩

136 These requests represent just a fraction of the complete list of Class
Requests defined by the CDC class. For more information, please refer to
official CDC specification.↩

137 Manufactures of modern and advanced HID devices use a dual
mechanism to implement advanced features like gestures or to configure
some device buttons. In this case, the device operates in a dual mode. By
default, the device sends standard HID reports so that it works like any
regular mouse until a dedicated driver is installed. Thanks to this driver, the
device will operate in advanced mode. This is the case, for example, of the
Logitech HID++ protocol.↩

138 This request is mandatory and must be supported by all devices.↩

139 This request is required only for boot devices.↩

140 This request is required only for boot devices.↩

141 Being the author an Italian citizen, he is fully authorized to say that :-
D↩

142 Like this author is :-)↩
143 The picture was taken from this
site(https://degreesplato.wordpress.com)↩

144 This especially true for low-cost productions.↩

145 Consider that the STM32F746-Discovery KIT is made with an eight
layers PCB.↩

146 Youtube is full of videos that show how to solder SMD packages with
this technique. ↩

147 Look at this document(http://bit.ly/1NVgYeI) from Eurocircuits to
discover more about PCB production classes.↩

148 ST discourages the use of this ferrite if VDD is below 1.8V.↩

149 However, keep in mind that the grounding scheme depends on the
actual implementation. Some designs need a strong separation between
analog and digital ground, plus some EMC-friendly devices (like ferrite
beads) to connect them. Welcome to the “obscure” world of EMC :-)↩

150 Sometimes, ST refers to these lines also as SWCLK and SWIO.↩

151 The actual implementation of these pins depends on the specific
STM32 series. For example, the STM32F030 provides only BOOT0 pin, and
substitutes the BOOT1 pin with a specific bit inside the Option Bytes memory
region. ↩

152 This film is based on a true and sad story happened to this author :-)↩

153 Honestly speaking, what CubeMX generates is not so good from a
project organization point of view.↩
