Chapter 2. Server Platform Hardware Rules
2.1. RISC-V Harts
A RISC-V server platform includes one or more RISC-V application processors and may include one
or more service processors. These service processors may provide services such as security and
power management to software executing on the application processors, and they may themselves
implement the RISC-V ISA. The rules in this section apply solely to harts in the application
processors of the SoC.

ID#                                                       Rule
RVA_010          The RISC-V application processor harts in the SoC MUST support the RVA23S64 ISA
                 profile [6].
RVA_020          The RISC-V application processor harts in the SoC MUST support the following
                 extensions:

                   • Sv48

                   • Sdtrig [7]

                   • Sdext [7]

                   • Zkr

                   • Ssccfg

                   • Ssstrict [6]

                   • Ssaia [8]

These mandates may be moved into a new ISA profile specification. The motivation for requiring Zkr
is that servers typically need access to an entropy source at boot time.
RVA_030          The RISC-V application processor harts in the SoC SHOULD support the Svadu
                 extension.

Svadu is expected to become mandatory in a future version of this specification.
RVA_040          The RISC-V application processor harts in the SoC SHOULD support the Ssctr
                 extension ([9]). If the Ssctr extension is implemented, a CTR depth of 32 MUST be
                 supported. Additional CTR depths MAY also be supported.

The motivation for suggesting Ssctr is that similar capabilities from other architectures are used by
profile-guided optimization (PGO) tools to improve builds for workloads typical of servers.
Implementing a CTR depth of 32 provides a common CTR depth across implementations for purposes
of VM migration. Ssctr is expected to become mandatory in a future version of this specification.
RVA_050          The RISC-V application processor harts within a supervisor execution
                 environment (SEE) must all support the same ISA and non-ISA extensions and the
                 same implementation-dependent choices with those extensions, except when
                 such differences do not interfere with architectural state migration and
                 subsequent execution of threads between harts.

ID#                                                        Rule

Architectural state comprises all ISA-visible state relevant to the SEE, including but not limited to:
XLEN, VLEN, cache block sizes, endianness, privilege levels, supported extensions and their versions,
and architecturally defined CSRs and their fields.

Permitted divergences (non-exhaustive):

    • Behaviors the ISA marks as RESERVED or UNSPECIFIED (e.g., outcomes explicitly left undefined,
     reserved encodings, or implementation-defined choices) when such differences do not affect state
     save/restore or execution correctness upon migration. If an execution thread is migrated, then
     the state saved from a first hart when restored on a second hart will result in the same execution
     results when execution is constrained to behavior that is neither RESERVED nor UNSPECIFIED.

    • Microarchitectural properties not architecturally visible (e.g., cache sizes/associativity/latency,
     pipeline depth, frequency, power states).

Prohibited divergences (non-exhaustive):

    • Differences in XLEN, VLEN, cache block sizes, endianness, mandatory privilege features, or any
     extension that is reported as present within the SEE on any application processor hart.

    • Differences in the advertised memory consistency model or coherency behavior required by the
     ISA and platform specification.
RVA_060            The RISC-V application processor MUST support at least 6 hardware performance
                   counters defined by the Zihpm extension in addition to the three counters defined
                   by the Zicntr extension.

The motivation for including at least six performance counters, in addition to the three counters
defined by the Zicntr extension, originates from prior experience with x86 servers.

2.2. RISC-V Hart SEE
ID#                                                        Rule
SEE_010            The RISC-V application processor hart MUST support:

                     • Single stepping using the step bit in dcsr

ID#                                                      Rule
SEE_020          The RISC-V application processor hart MUST support:

                  • At least 4 instruction address match triggers.

                  • At least 4 load/store address match triggers.

                  • At least one icount trigger to support single stepping.

                  • At least one interrupt trigger.

                  • At least one exception trigger.

                  • All triggers MUST support

                      ◦ Privilege mode filtering (VS, VU, S, U).

                      ◦ Meeting the requirements for configuring action=0.

                      ◦ Matching all legal addresses using instruction and load/store address
                        triggers with action=0.

                      ◦ Filtering using mhselect values of 0, 2, and 6.

                      ◦ Filtering using sselect values of 0 and 2.

                  • Triggers MAY support

                      ◦ Filtering using mhselect values of 1 and 5.

                      ◦ Filtering using sselect values of 1.

                  • Supported mhselect and sselect values MUST be identical for all triggers.

                  • When trigger filtering using hcontext is supported, hcontext MUST be at least
                    14 bits wide, and the filter must support matching all values that can be held
                    in hcontext.

                  • When trigger filtering using scontext is supported, scontext MUST be at least
                    32 bits wide, and the filter must support matching all values that can be held
                    in scontext.

The motivation for including at least four instruction address and four load/store address match
triggers originates from prior experience with x86 servers.

2.3. RISC-V SoC
ID#                                                      Rule
HSOC_010         RISC-V SoCs MUST comply with the Server SoC v1.0 specification [10].
HSOC_020         All SoC peripherals that are intended by the platform design to be assignable to a
                 virtual machine or exposed to a user-space device driver MUST be PCIe devices or
                 comply with the rules for SoC-integrated PCIe devices ([10], Section 2.4).

ID#                                                         Rule

This rule does not apply to components not intended by the platform for virtual machine or user-
space assignment such as:

     • Interrupt controllers (e.g., APLIC).

     • IOMMUs.

     • Debug modules, trace control blocks, RAS banks, and performance monitoring units.

     • Controllers, including the root of trust (RoT) controllers, power management controllers, and
       other SoC management controllers.

2.4. Peripherals
ID#                                                         Rule
HPER_010             For remote-access and system engineering purposes in early boot software, either
                     a fully 16550-compatible [11] or a fully pl011-compatible [12] UART MUST be
                     implemented.

This is a stronger requirement than the Server SoC MNG_030 rule [10]. The intention here is to simplify
early boot software support requirements. This UART is not intended to be directly assignable to
virtual machines, and thus there is no requirement for this UART to appear as a PCI device. This
specification does not provide guidance around how the UART is physically exposed, i.e. via RS232
signalling, USB, a BMC or other mechanism.
HPER_020             The implemented UART MUST support:

                      • Interrupt-driven operation using a wired interrupt.

                      • Flow control.

                      • 115200 baud operation.
HPER_030             If a USB controller is implemented, it MUST comply with XHCI 1.2 or later [13].
HPER_040             Implemented XHCI controllers MUST support:

                      • 64-bit addressing (AC64 = '1').

                      • A 4K PAGESIZE.
HPER_050             If a SATA controller is implemented, it MUST comply with AHCI 1.3.1 or later [14].
HPER_060             Implemented AHCI controllers MUST support:

                      • 64-bit addressing (S64A = '1').
HPER_070             A battery-backed Real Time Clock (the "Server Platform RTC") MUST be
                     implemented for use by platform firmware for UEFI certificate validity checking.
                     This RTC MAY optionally be used by other system functions.

ID#                                                      Rule
HPER_080         If the operating system does not have access to its own OS-managed Real Time
                 Clock, the Server Platform RTC SHOULD be exposed to the operating system for
                 clock read access via EFI_GET_TIME, and, if the system security profile allows the
                 operating system to change the Server Platform RTC clock, for clock setting access
                 via EFI_SET_TIME.

Allowing operating systems to change the time and date used for UEFI certificate validity checks may
have unexpected consequences, including, for example, disrupting certificate verification in platform
firmware, or affecting system functions other than the OS that rely on the Server Platform RTC.
HPER_090         A Trusted Platform Module (TPM) MUST be implemented and adhere to the TPM
                 2.0 Library specification [15].

It is common for secure systems to support multiple trust chains with their own root of trust. For
example, a TPM can be secondary root of trust for UEFI boot flows while a hardware RoT is the root
of trust for platform firmware, platform attestation, security lifecycle management of the secondary
roots of trust, among others.

