Chapter 4. Server Platform Security Rules
Security rules straddle hardware and firmware.

ID#                                                          Rule
SEC_010             The server platform MUST implement a hardware Root of Trust (RoT) ([19]) as a
                    dedicated and trusted subsystem, isolated from the application processor, to
                    provide security-specific functions.

A Root of Trust (RoT) is a component that performs one or more security-specific functions, such as
measurement, storage, reporting, verification, update, security lifecycle management, and key
derivation.

An RoT is typically a combination of a minimal amount of hardware and firmware that must be
implicitly trusted by all system components to always behave as expected, since its misbehavior
cannot be detected under normal operation.

A hardware RoT moves critical functions and assets off the application processor hart to a dedicated
and isolated trusted subsystem, which provides stronger protection against both physical and logical
attacks.

Examples of open-source RoT IPs include OpenTitan ([20]) and Caliptra ([21]).
SEC_020             The hardware RoT MUST manage a security lifecycle.

A security lifecycle reflects the trustworthiness of a system throughout its lifetime and indicates the
lifecycle state of hardware-provisioned assets.

The minimum security lifecycle should include the following states:

     • Manufacture – The system may not yet be locked down and contains no hardware-provisioned
      assets.

     • Security Provisioning – The process of provisioning hardware-provisioned assets.

     • Secured – Hardware-provisioned assets are locked (immutable); only authorized software may be
      executed, and revealing debug capabilities are disabled.

     • Recoverable Debug – Part of the system is in a revealing debug state. The RoT remains
      uncompromised, and hardware-provisioned secrets remain protected.

     • Terminated – Hardware-provisioned assets are permanently inaccessible and revoked prior to
      entering this state. This includes derived assets such as attestation keys.
SEC_030             The hardware RoT SHOULD implement a secure identity and SHOULD support
                    platform attestation.

ID#                                                         Rule

A secure identity is an element capable of generating a cryptographic signature that can be verified
by a relying party. It represents the immutable part of the secure platform—such as immutable
hardware, configurations, and firmware. Immutable components cannot be modified after the
completion of security provisioning. See ([22]) for examples of secure identity derivation and use.

Attestation is the process of vouching for the accuracy of information ([19]). Platform attestation
enables a relying party to determine the trustworthiness of the platform before submitting sensitive
assets to it. See ([23]) for an example of the protocols used for attestation.

The attestation must be signed by the hardware RoT using a hardware-provisioned secure identity or
a cryptographic key derived in a verifiable manner from that identity.
SEC_040           The firmware MUST implement UEFI Secure Boot and Driver Signing ([5] Section
                  32, "Secure Boot and Driver Signing")
SEC_050           For systems that are not intended to be locked down, or that are intended to be
                  locked down but have not been locked down yet, it MUST be possible for a
                  physically present and/or strongly authenticated out-of-band management user to
                  disable Secure Boot enforcement, thus allowing unsigned code to be executed.
SEC_060           For systems that are not intended to be locked down, or that are intended to be
                  locked down but have not been locked down yet, it MUST be possible for a
                  physically present and/or strongly authenticated out-of-band management user to
                  fully manage the contents of the PK, KEK, db and dbx Secure Boot key stores. This
                  includes the ability to delete all factory-provided keys, enroll their own custom
                  keys, and reset the key stores to their factory state.

The term "locked down" refers to the (optional) ability to prevent the Secure Boot configuration from
being modified further once the desired security lifecycle state has been reached. This could be
implemented, for example, via an eFuse.

Note that the "locked down" state is distinct from the "Deployed Mode" Secure Boot state defined in
the UEFI spec.

Being able to prevent even a physically present user from altering the Secure Boot configuration can
be useful in the context of highly regulated industries or government bodies.
SEC_070           The platform and firmware MUST back the UEFI Authenticated Variables
                  implementation with a mechanism that cannot be accessed or tampered by an
                  unauthorized software or hardware agent.
SEC_080           The firmware MUST implement in-band firmware updates as per [16].
SEC_090           Firmware update payloads MUST be digitally signed.
SEC_100           Firmware update signatures MUST be validated before being applied.

ID#                                                     Rule

Cryptographic algorithms and key sizes used for firmware update signing and verification should
comply with the security and regulatory requirements of the geographies or markets in which the
platform operates. Examples of relevant standards include the U.S. National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) cryptographic guidelines and the Commercial National Security Algorithm
(CNSA) Suite.
SEC_110          It MUST NOT be possible to bypass secure boot, authentication or digital signature
                 failures, except as specified in SEC_050 and SEC_060.

