Reversing: Secrets of
Reverse Engineering
Reversing: Secrets of
Reverse Engineering

           Eldad Eilam
Reversing: Secrets of Reverse Engineering
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
10475 Crosspoint Boulevard
Indianapolis, IN 46256
www.wiley.com

Copyright © 2005 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
Library of Congress Control Number: 2005921595
ISBN-10: 0-7645-7481-7
ISBN-13: 978-0-7645-7481-8
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
1B/QR/QU/QV/IN
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copy-
right Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing,
Inc., 10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax (317) 572-4355,
e-mail: brandreview@wiley.com.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no repre-
sentations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fit-
ness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promo-
tional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every
situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in ren-
dering any professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a com-
petent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be
liable for any damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred
to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean
that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work
was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside the
U.S. at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo and related trade dress are trademarks or
registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates, in the United States
and other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks
are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with
any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
                                                      Credits

Executive Editor                   Graphics and Production Specialists
Robert Elliott                     Denny Hager
                                   Jennifer Heleine
Development Editor
                                   Lynsey Osborn
Eileen Bien Calabro
                                   Mary Gillot Virgin
Copy Editor
                                   Quality Control Technician
Foxxe Editorial Services
                                   Leeann Harney
Editorial Manager
                                   Proofreading and Indexing
Mary Beth Wakefield
                                   TECHBOOKS Production Services
Vice President & Executive Group
                                   Cover Designer
Publisher
                                   Michael Trent
Richard Swadley
Vice President and Publisher
Joseph B. Wikert
Project Editor
Pamela Hanley
Project Coordinator
Ryan Steffen

                                                         Foreword

It is amazing, and rather disconcerting, to realize how much software we run
without knowing for sure what it does. We buy software off the shelf in shrink-
wrapped packages. We run setup utilities that install numerous files, change
system settings, delete or disable older versions and superceded utilities, and
modify critical registry files. Every time we access a Web site, we may invoke
or interact with dozens of programs and code segments that are necessary to
give us the intended look, feel, and behavior. We purchase CDs with hundreds
of games and utilities or download them as shareware. We exchange useful
programs with colleagues and friends when we have tried only a fraction of
each program’s features.
   Then, we download updates and install patches, trusting that the vendors
are sure that the changes are correct and complete. We blindly hope that the
latest change to each program keeps it compatible with all of the rest of the
programs on our system. We rely on much software that we do not understand
and do not know very well at all.
   I refer to a lot more than our desktop or laptop personal computers. The
concept of ubiquitous computing, or “software everywhere,” is rapidly
putting software control and interconnection in devices throughout our envi-
ronment. The average automobile now has more lines of software code in its
engine controls than were required to land the Apollo astronauts on the Moon.
   Today’s software has become so complex and interconnected that the devel-
oper often does not know all the features and repercussions of what has been
created in an application. It is frequently too expensive and time-consuming to
test all control paths of a program and all groupings of user options. Now, with
multiple architecture layers and an explosion of networked platforms that the
software will run on or interact with, it has become literally impossible for all

viii   Foreword

       combinations to be examined and tested. Like the problems of detecting drug
       interactions in advance, many software systems are fielded with issues
       unknown and unpredictable.
          Reverse engineering is a critical set of techniques and tools for understand-
       ing what software is really all about. Formally, it is “the process of analyzing a
       subject system to identify the system’s components and their interrelation-
       ships and to create representations of the system in another form or at a higher
       level of abstraction”(IEEE 1990). This allows us to visualize the software’s
       structure, its ways of operation, and the features that drive its behavior. The
       techniques of analysis, and the application of automated tools for software
       examination, give us a reasonable way to comprehend the complexity of the
       software and to uncover its truth.
          Reverse engineering has been with us a long time. The conceptual Revers-
       ing process occurs every time someone looks at someone else’s code. But, it
       also occurs when a developer looks at his or her own code several days after it
       was written. Reverse engineering is a discovery process. When we take a fresh
       look at code, whether developed by ourselves or others, we examine and we
       learn and we see things we may not expect.
          While it had been the topic of some sessions at conferences and computer
       user groups, reverse engineering of software came of age in 1990. Recognition
       in the engineering community came through the publication of a taxonomy on
       reverse engineering and design recovery concepts in IEEE Software magazine.
       Since then, there has been a broad and growing body of research on Reversing
       techniques, software visualization, program understanding, data reverse engi-
       neering, software analysis, and related tools and approaches. Research
       forums, such as the annual international Working Conference on Reverse
       Engineering (WCRE), explore, amplify, and expand the value of available tech-
       niques. There is now increasing interest in binary Reversing, the principal
       focus of this book, to support platform migration, interoperability, malware
       detection, and problem determination.
          As a management and information technology consultant, I have often been
       asked: “How can you possibly condone reverse engineering?” This is soon fol-
       lowed by: “You’ve developed and sold software. Don’t you want others to
       respect and protect your copyrights and intellectual property?” This discus-
       sion usually starts from the negative connotation of the term reverse engineer-
       ing, particularly in software license agreements. However, reverse engineering
       technologies are of value in many ways to producers and consumers of soft-
       ware along the supply chain.
          A stethoscope could be used by a burglar to listen to the lock mechanism of
       a safe as the tumblers fall in place. But the same stethoscope could be used
       by your family doctor to detect breathing or heart problems. Or, it could
       be used by a computer technician to listen closely to the operating sounds
       of a sealed disk drive to diagnose a problem without exposing the drive to
                                                                     Foreword      ix

potentially-damaging dust and pollen. The tool is not inherently good or bad.
The issue is the use to which the tool is put.
   In the early 1980s, IBM decided that it would no longer release to its cus-
tomers the source code for its mainframe computer operating systems. Main-
frame customers had always relied on the source code for reference in problem
solving and to tailor, modify, and extend the IBM operating system products. I
still have my button from the IBM user group Share that reads: “If SOURCE is
outlawed, only outlaws will have SOURCE,” a word play on a famous argu-
ment by opponents of gun-control laws. Applied to current software, this
points out that hackers and developers of malicious code know many tech-
niques for deciphering others’ software. It is useful for the good guys to know
these techniques, too.
   Reverse engineering is particularly useful in modern software analysis for a
wide variety of purposes:
  ■■   Finding malicious code. Many virus and malware detection techniques
       use reverse engineering to understand how abhorrent code is struc-
       tured and functions. Through Reversing, recognizable patterns emerge
       that can be used as signatures to drive economical detectors and code
       scanners.
  ■■   Discovering unexpected flaws and faults. Even the most well-designed
       system can have holes that result from the nature of our “forward engi-
       neering” development techniques. Reverse engineering can help iden-
       tify flaws and faults before they become mission-critical software
       failures.
  ■■   Finding the use of others’ code. In supporting the cognizant use of
       intellectual property, it is important to understand where protected
       code or techniques are used in applications. Reverse engineering tech-
       niques can be used to detect the presence or absence of software ele-
       ments of concern.
  ■■   Finding the use of shareware and open source code where it was not
       intended to be used. In the opposite of the infringing code concern, if a
       product is intended for security or proprietary use, the presence of pub-
       licly available code can be of concern. Reverse engineering enables the
       detection of code replication issues.
  ■■   Learning from others’ products of a different domain or purpose.
       Reverse engineering techniques can enable the study of advanced soft-
       ware approaches and allow new students to explore the products of
       masters. This can be a very useful way to learn and to build on a grow-
       ing body of code knowledge. Many Web sites have been built by seeing
       what other Web sites have done. Many Web developers learned HTML
       and Web programming techniques by viewing the source of other sites.
x   Foreword

      ■■   Discovering features or opportunities that the original developers did
           not realize. Code complexity can foster new innovation. Existing tech-
           niques can be reused in new contexts. Reverse engineering can lead to
           new discoveries about software and new opportunities for innovation.
       In the application of computer-aided software engineering (CASE)
    approaches and automated code generation, in both new system development
    and software maintenance, I have long contended that any system we build
    should be immediately run through a suite of reverse engineering tools. The
    holes and issues that are uncovered would save users, customers, and support
    staff many hours of effort in problem detection and solution. The savings
    industry-wide from better code understanding could be enormous.
       I’ve been involved in research and applications of software reverse engi-
    neering for 30 years, on mainframes, mid-range systems and PCs, from pro-
    gram language statements, binary modules, data files, and job control streams.
    In that time, I have heard many approaches explained and seen many tech-
    niques tried. Even with that background, I have learned much from this book
    and its perspective on reversing techniques. I am sure that you will too.

      Elliot Chikofsky
      Engineering Management and Integration (Herndon, VA)
      Chair, Reengineering Forum
      Executive Secretary, IEEE Technical Council on Software Engineering
                                  Acknowledgments

First I would like to thank my beloved Odelya (“Oosa”) Buganim for her con-
stant support and encouragement—I couldn’t have done it without you!
   I would like to thank my family for their patience and support: my grand-
parents, Yosef and Pnina Vertzberger, my parents, Avraham and Nava Eilam-
Amzallag, and my brother, Yaron Eilam.
   I’d like to thank my editors at Wiley: My executive editor, Bob Elliott, for
giving me the opportunity to write this book and to work with him, and my
development editor, Eileen Bien Calabro, for being patient and forgiving with
a first-time author whose understanding of the word deadline comes from
years of working in the software business.
   Many talented people have invested a lot of time and energy in reviewing
this book and helping me make sure that it is accurate and enjoyable to read.
I’d like to give special thanks to David Sleeper for spending all of those long
hours reviewing the entire manuscript, and to Alex Ben-Ari for all of his use-
ful input and valuable insights. Thanks to George E. Kalb for his review of Part
III, to Mike Van Emmerik for his review of the decompilation chapter, and to
Dr. Roger Kingsley for his detailed review and input. Finally, I’d like to
acknowledge Peter S. Canelias who reviewed the legal aspects of this book.
   This book would probably never exist if it wasn’t for Avner (“Sabi”)
Zangvil, who originally suggested the idea of writing a book about reverse
engineering and encouraged me to actually write it.
   I’d like to acknowledge my good friends, Adar Cohen and Ori Weitz for
their friendship and support.
   Last, but not least, this book would not have been the same without Bookey,
our charming cat who rested and purred on my lap for many hours while I
was writing this book.

                                                             Contents

Foreword                                                                     vii
Acknowledgments                                                              xi
Introduction                                                               xxiii
Part I         Reversing 101                                                  1
Chapter 1      Foundations                                                    3
               What Is Reverse Engineering?                                   3
               Software Reverse Engineering: Reversing                        4
               Reversing Applications                                         4
                 Security-Related Reversing                                   5
                    Malicious Software                                        5
                    Reversing Cryptographic Algorithms                        6
                    Digital Rights Management                                 7
                    Auditing Program Binaries                                 7
                 Reversing in Software Development                            8
                    Achieving Interoperability with Proprietary Software      8
                    Developing Competing Software                             8
                    Evaluating Software Quality and Robustness                9
               Low-Level Software                                             9
                 Assembly Language                                           10
                 Compilers                                                   11
                 Virtual Machines and Bytecodes                              12
                 Operating Systems                                           13

                  The Reversing Process                   13
                    System-Level Reversing                14
                    Code-Level Reversing                  14
                  The Tools                               14
                    System-Monitoring Tools               15
                    Disassemblers                         15
                    Debuggers                             15
                    Decompilers                           16
                  Is Reversing Legal?                     17
                    Interoperability                      17
                    Competition                           18
                    Copyright Law                         19
                    Trade Secrets and Patents             20
                    The Digital Millenium Copyright Act   20
                    DMCA Cases                            22
                    License Agreement Considerations      23
                  Code Samples & Tools                    23
                  Conclusion                              23
      Chapter 2   Low-Level Software                      25
                  High-Level Perspectives                 26
                    Program Structure                     26
                       Modules                            28
                       Common Code Constructs             28
                    Data Management                       29
                       Variables                          30
                       User-Defined Data Structures       30
                       Lists                              31
                    Control Flow                          32
                    High-Level Languages                  33
                       C                                  34
                       C++                                35
                       Java                               36
                       C#                                 36
                  Low-Level Perspectives                  37
                    Low-Level Data Management             37
                      Registers                           39
                      The Stack                           40
                      Heaps                               42
                      Executable Data Sections            43
                    Control Flow                          43
                  Assembly Language 101                   44
                    Registers                             44
                    Flags                                 46
                    Instruction Format                    47
                    Basic Instructions                    48
                       Moving Data                        49
                       Arithmetic                         49
                       Comparing Operands                 50

                Conditional Branches                                   51
                Function Calls                                         51
              Examples                                                 52
            A Primer on Compilers and Compilation                      53
              Defining a Compiler                                      54
              Compiler Architecture                                    55
                 Front End                                             55
                 Intermediate Representations                          55
                 Optimizer                                             56
                 Back End                                              57
              Listing Files                                            58
              Specific Compilers                                       59
            Execution Environments                                     60
              Software Execution Environments (Virtual Machines)       60
                 Bytecodes                                             61
                 Interpreters                                          61
                 Just-in-Time Compilers                                62
                 Reversing Strategies                                  62
              Hardware Execution Environments in Modern Processors     63
                 Intel NetBurst                                        65
                 µops (Micro-Ops)                                      65
                 Pipelines                                             65
                 Branch Prediction                                     67
            Conclusion                                                 68
Chapter 3   Windows Fundamentals                                      69
            Components and Basic Architecture                         70
              Brief History                                            70
              Features                                                 70
              Supported Hardware                                       71
            Memory Management                                          71
              Virtual Memory and Paging                                72
                 Paging                                                73
                 Page Faults                                           73
              Working Sets                                             74
              Kernel Memory and User Memory                            74
              The Kernel Memory Space                                  75
              Section Objects                                          77
              VAD Trees                                                78
              User-Mode Allocations                                    78
              Memory Management APIs                                   79
            Objects and Handles                                        80
              Named objects                                            81
            Processes and Threads                                      83
              Processes                                                84
              Threads                                                  84
              Context Switching                                        85
              Synchronization Objects                                  86
              Process Initialization Sequence                          87

                  Application Programming Interfaces          88
                    The Win32 API                             88
                    The Native API                            90
                    System Calling Mechanism                  91
                  Executable Formats                          93
                    Basic Concepts                            93
                    Image Sections                            95
                    Section Alignment                         95
                    Dynamically Linked Libraries              96
                    Headers                                   97
                    Imports and Exports                       99
                    Directories                               99
                  Input and Output                           103
                    The I/O System                           103
                    The Win32 Subsystem                      104
                      Object Management                      105
                  Structured Exception Handling              105
                  Conclusion                                 107
      Chapter 4   Reversing Tools                            109
                  Different Reversing Approaches             110
                    Offline Code Analysis (Dead-Listing)     110
                    Live Code Analysis                       110
                  Disassemblers                              110
                      IDA Pro                                112
                    ILDasm                                   115
                  Debuggers                                  116
                    User-Mode Debuggers                      118
                      OllyDbg                                118
                      User Debugging in WinDbg               119
                      IDA Pro                                121
                      PEBrowse Professional Interactive      122
                    Kernel-Mode Debuggers                    122
                      Kernel Debugging in WinDbg             123
                      Numega SoftICE                         124
                      Kernel Debugging on Virtual Machines   127
                  Decompilers                                129
                  System-Monitoring Tools                    129
                  Patching Tools                             131
                    Hex Workshop                             131
                  Miscellaneous Reversing Tools              133
                    Executable-Dumping Tools                 133
                      DUMPBIN                                133
                      PEView                                 137
                      PEBrowse Professional                  137
                  Conclusion                                 138

Part II     Applied Reversing                                    139
Chapter 5   Beyond the Documentation                             141
            Reversing and Interoperability                       142
            Laying the Ground Rules                              142
            Locating Undocumented APIs                           143
              What Are We Looking For?                            144
            Case Study: The Generic Table API in NTDLL.DLL        145
              RtlInitializeGenericTable                           146
              RtlNumberGenericTableElements                       151
              RtlIsGenericTableEmpty                              152
              RtlGetElementGenericTable                           153
                 Setup and Initialization                         155
                 Logic and Structure                              159
                 Search Loop 1                                    161
                 Search Loop 2                                    163
                 Search Loop 3                                    164
                 Search Loop 4                                    165
                 Reconstructing the Source Code                   165
              RtlInsertElementGenericTable                        168
                 RtlLocateNodeGenericTable                        170
                 RtlRealInsertElementWorker                       178
                 Splay Trees                                      187
              RtlLookupElementGenericTable                        188
              RtlDeleteElementGenericTable                        193
              Putting the Pieces Together                         194
            Conclusion                                            196
Chapter 6   Deciphering File Formats                             199
            Cryptex                                              200
            Using Cryptex                                        201
            Reversing Cryptex                                    202
            The Password Verification Process                    207
              Catching the “Bad Password” Message                 207
              The Password Transformation Algorithm               210
              Hashing the Password                                213
            The Directory Layout                                  218
              Analyzing the Directory Processing Code             218
              Analyzing a File Entry                              223
            Dumping the Directory Layout                          227
            The File Extraction Process                           228
              Scanning the File List                              234
              Decrypting the File                                 235
              The Floating-Point Sequence                         236
              The Decryption Loop                                 238
              Verifying the Hash Value                            239
            The Big Picture                                       239
            Digging Deeper                                        241
            Conclusion                                            242

     Chapter 7   Auditing Program Binaries                              243
                 Defining the Problem                                   243
                 Vulnerabilities                                        245
                   Stack Overflows                                      245
                      A Simple Stack Vulnerability                      247
                      Intrinsic Implementations                         249
                      Stack Checking                                    250
                      Nonexecutable Memory                              254
                   Heap Overflows                                       255
                   String Filters                                       256
                   Integer Overflows                                    256
                      Arithmetic Operations on User-Supplied Integers   258
                   Type Conversion Errors                               260
                 Case-Study: The IIS Indexing Service Vulnerability     262
                   CVariableSet::AddExtensionControlBlock               263
                   DecodeURLEscapes                                     267
                 Conclusion                                             271
     Chapter 8   Reversing Malware                                      273
                 Types of Malware                                       274
                   Viruses                                              274
                   Worms                                                274
                   Trojan Horses                                        275
                   Backdoors                                            276
                   Mobile Code                                          276
                   Adware/Spyware                                       276
                 Sticky Software                                        277
                 Future Malware                                         278
                   Information-Stealing Worms                           278
                   BIOS/Firmware Malware                                279
                 Uses of Malware                                        280
                 Malware Vulnerability                                  281
                 Polymorphism                                           282
                 Metamorphism                                           283
                 Establishing a Secure Environment                      285
                 The Backdoor.Hacarmy.D                                 285
                   Unpacking the Executable                             286
                   Initial Impressions                                  290
                   The Initial Installation                             291
                   Initializing Communications                          294
                   Connecting to the Server                             296
                   Joining the Channel                                  298
                   Communicating with the Backdoor                      299
                   Running SOCKS4 Servers                               303
                   Clearing the Crime Scene                             303
                 The Backdoor.Hacarmy.D: A Command Reference            304
                 Conclusion                                             306

Part III    Cracking                                                  307
Chapter 9   Piracy and Copy Protection                                309
            Copyrights in the New World                               309
            The Social Aspect                                         310
            Software Piracy                                           310
              Defining the Problem                                     311
              Class Breaks                                             312
              Requirements                                             313
              The Theoretically Uncrackable Model                      314
            Types of Protection                                        314
              Media-Based Protections                                  314
              Serial Numbers                                           315
              Challenge Response and Online Activations                315
              Hardware-Based Protections                               316
              Software as a Service                                    317
            Advanced Protection Concepts                               318
              Crypto-Processors                                        318
            Digital Rights Management                                  319
              DRM Models                                               320
                The Windows Media Rights Manager                       321
                Secure Audio Path                                      321
            Watermarking                                               321
            Trusted Computing                                          322
            Attacking Copy Protection Technologies                     324
            Conclusion                                                 324
Chapter 10 Antireversing Techniques                                   327
           Why Antireversing?                                         327
           Basic Approaches to Antireversing                          328
           Eliminating Symbolic Information                           329
           Code Encryption                                            330
           Active Antidebugger Techniques                             331
              Debugger Basics                                          331
              The IsDebuggerPresent API                                332
              SystemKernelDebuggerInformation                          333
              Detecting SoftICE Using the Single-Step Interrupt        334
              The Trap Flag                                            335
              Code Checksums                                           335
            Confusing Disassemblers                                    336
              Linear Sweep Disassemblers                               337
              Recursive Traversal Disassemblers                        338
              Applications                                             343
            Code Obfuscation                                           344
            Control Flow Transformations                               346
              Opaque Predicates                                        346
              Confusing Decompilers                                    348
              Table Interpretation                                     348

                   Inlining and Outlining                              353
                   Interleaving Code                                   354
                   Ordering Transformations                            355
                Data Transformations                                   355
                   Modifying Variable Encoding                         355
                   Restructuring Arrays                                356
                Conclusion                                             356
     Chapter 11 Breaking Protections                                   357
                Patching                                               358
                Keygenning                                             364
                Ripping Key-Generation Algorithms                      365
                Advanced Cracking: Defender                            370
                   Reversing Defender’s Initialization Routine         377
                   Analyzing the Decrypted Code                        387
                   SoftICE’s Disappearance                             396
                   Reversing the Secondary Thread                      396
                   Defeating the “Killer” Thread                       399
                   Loading KERNEL32.DLL                                400
                   Reencrypting the Function                           401
                   Back at the Entry Point                             402
                   Parsing the Program Parameters                      404
                   Processing the Username                             406
                   Validating User Information                         407
                   Unlocking the Code                                  409
                   Brute-Forcing Your Way through Defender             409
                Protection Technologies in Defender                    415
                   Localized Function-Level Encryption                 415
                      Relatively Strong Cipher Block Chaining          415
                      Reencrypting                                     416
                   Obfuscated Application/Operating System Interface   416
                   Processor Time-Stamp Verification Thread            417
                   Runtime Generation of Decryption Keys               418
                      Interdependent Keys                              418
                      User-Input-Based Decryption Keys                 419
                   Heavy Inlining                                      419
                Conclusion                                             419
     Part IV    Beyond Disassembly                                     421
     Chapter 12 Reversing .NET                                         423
                Ground Rules                                           424
                .NET Basics                                            426
                   Managed Code                                        426
                   .NET Programming Languages                          428
                   Common Type System (CTS)                            428
                Intermediate Language (IL)                             429
                   The Evaluation Stack                                430
                   Activation Records                                  430

              IL Instructions                                       430
              IL Code Samples                                       433
                 Counting Items                                     433
                 A Linked List Sample                               436
            Decompilers                                             443
            Obfuscators                                             444
              Renaming Symbols                                      444
              Control Flow Obfuscation                              444
              Breaking Decompilation and Disassembly                444
            Reversing Obfuscated Code                               445
              XenoCode Obfuscator                                   446
              DotFuscator by Preemptive Solutions                   448
              Remotesoft Obfuscator and Linker                      451
              Remotesoft Protector                                  452
              Precompiled Assemblies                                453
              Encrypted Assemblies                                  453
            Conclusion                                              455
Chapter 13 Decompilation                                           457
           Native Code Decompilation: An Unsolvable Problem?       457
           Typical Decompiler Architecture                         459
           Intermediate Representations                            459
              Expressions and Expression Trees                      461
              Control Flow Graphs                                   462
            The Front End                                           463
              Semantic Analysis                                     463
              Generating Control Flow Graphs                        464
            Code Analysis                                           466
              Data-Flow Analysis                                    466
                 Single Static Assignment (SSA)                     467
                 Data Propagation                                   468
                 Register Variable Identification                   470
                 Data Type Propagation                              471
              Type Analysis                                         472
                 Primitive Data Types                               472
                 Complex Data Types                                 473
              Control Flow Analysis                                 475
              Finding Library Functions                             475
            The Back End                                            476
            Real-World IA-32 Decompilation                          477
            Conclusion                                              477
Appendix A Deciphering Code Structures                             479
Appendix B Understanding Compiled Arithmetic                       519
Appendix C Deciphering Program Data                                537
Index                                                              561
                                                  Introduction

   Welcome to Reversing: Secrets of Reverse Engineering. This book was written
after years of working on software development projects that repeatedly
required reverse engineering of third party code, for a variety of reasons. At
first this was a fairly tedious process that was only performed when there was
simply no alternative means of getting information. Then all of a sudden, a
certain mental barrier was broken and I found myself rapidly sifting through
undocumented machine code, quickly deciphering its meaning and getting
the answers I wanted regarding the code’s function and purpose. At that point
it dawned on me that this was a remarkably powerful skill, because it meant
that I could fairly easily get answers to any questions I had regarding software
I was working with, even when I had no access to the relevant documentation
or to the source code of the program in question. This book is about providing
knowledge and techniques to allow anyone with a decent understanding of
software to do just that.
   The idea is simple: we should develop a solid understanding of low-level
software, and learn techniques that will allow us to easily dig into any pro-
gram’s binaries and retrieve information. Not sure why a system behaves the
way it does and no one else has the answers? No problem—dig into it on your
own and find out. Sounds scary and unrealistic? It’s not, and this is the very
purpose of this book, to teach and demonstrate reverse engineering techniques
that can be applied daily, for solving a wide variety of problems.
   But I’m getting ahead of myself. For those of you that haven’t been exposed
to the concept of software reverse engineering, a little introduction is in order.

xxiv Introduction

     Reverse Engineering and Low-Level Software
     Before we get into the various topics discussed throughout this book, we
     should formally introduce its primary subject: reverse engineering. Reverse
     engineering is a process where an engineered artifact (such as a car, a jet
     engine, or a software program) is deconstructed in a way that reveals its inner-
     most details, such as its design and architecture. This is similar to scientific
     research that studies natural phenomena, with the difference that no one com-
     monly refers to scientific research as reverse engineering, simply because no
     one knows for sure whether or not nature was ever engineered.
        In the software world reverse engineering boils down to taking an existing
     program for which source-code or proper documentation is not available and
     attempting to recover details regarding its’ design and implementation. In
     some cases source code is available but the original developers who created it
     are unavailable. This book deals specifically with what is commonly referred
     to as binary reverse engineering. Binary reverse engineering techniques aim at
     extracting valuable information from programs for which source code in
     unavailable. In some cases it is possible to recover the actual source-code (or a
     similar high-level representation) from the program binaries, which greatly
     simplifies the task because reading code presented in a high-level language is
     far easier than reading low-level assembly language code. In other cases we
     end up with a fairly cryptic assembly language listing that describes the pro-
     gram. This book explains this process and why things work this way, while
     describing in detail how to decipher the program’s code in a variety of differ-
     ent environments.

       I’ve decided to name this book “Reversing”, which is the term used by many
       online communities to describe reverse engineering. Because the term
       reversing can be seen as a nickname for reverse engineering I will be using the
       two terms interchangeably throughout this book.

       Most people get a bit anxious when they try to imagine trying to extract
     meaningful information from an executable binary, and I’ve made it the pri-
     mary goal of this book to prove that this fear is not justified. Binary reverse
     engineering works, it can solve problems that are often incredibly difficult to
     solve in any other way, and it is not as difficult as you might think once you
     approach it in the right way.
       This book focuses on reverse engineering, but it actually teaches a great deal
     more than that. Reverse engineering is frequently used in a variety of environ-
     ments in the software industry, and one of the primary goals of this book is to
     explore many of these fields while teaching reverse engineering.
                                                                   Introduction      xxv

  Here is a brief listing of some of the topics discussed throughout this book:
  ■■   Assembly language for IA-32 compatible processors and how to read
       compiler-generated assembly language code.
  ■■   Operating systems internals and how to reverse engineer an operating
       system.
  ■■   Reverse engineering on the .NET platform, including an introduction to
       the .NET development platform and its assembly language: MSIL.
  ■■   Data reverse engineering: how to decipher an undocumented file-for-
       mat or network protocol.
  ■■   The legal aspects of reverse engineering: when is it legal and when is
       it not?
  ■■   Copy protection and digital rights management technologies.
  ■■   How reverse engineering is applied by crackers to defeat copy protec-
       tion technologies.
  ■■   Techniques for preventing people from reverse engineering code and a
       sober attempt at evaluating their effectiveness.
  ■■   The general principles behind modern-day malicious programs and
       how reverse engineering is applied to study and neutralize such
       programs.
  ■■   A live session where a real-world malicious program is dissected and
       revealed, also revealing how an attacker can communicate with the pro-
       gram to gain control of infected systems.
  ■■   The theory and principles behind decompilers, and their effectiveness
       on the various low-level languages.

How This Book Is Organized
This book is divided into four parts. The first part provides basics that will be
required in order to follow the rest of the text, and the other three present dif-
ferent reverse engineering scenarios and demonstrates real-world case stud-
ies. The following is a detailed description of each of the four parts.
  Part I – Reversing 101: The book opens with a discussion of all the basics
    required in order to understand low-level software. As you would
    expect, these chapters couldn’t possibly cover everything, and should
    only be seen as a refreshing survey of materials you’ve studied before. If
    all or most of the topics discussed in the first three chapters of this book
    are completely new to you, then this book is probably not for you. The
xxvi Introduction

         primary topics studied in these chapters are: an introduction to reverse
         engineering and its various applications (chapter 1), low-level software
         concepts (chapter 2), and operating systems internals, with an emphasis
         on Microsoft Windows (chapter 3). If you are highly experienced with
         these topics and with low-level software in general, you can probably
         skip these chapters. Chapter 4 discusses the various types of reverse
         engineering tools used and recommends specific tools that are suitable
         for a variety of situations. Many of these tools are used in the reverse
         engineering sessions demonstrated throughout this book.
       Part II – Applied Reversing: The second part of the book demonstrates
         real reverse engineering projects performed on real software. Each chap-
         ter focuses on a different kind of reverse engineering application. Chap-
         ter 5 discusses the highly-popular scenario where an operating-system
         or third party library is reverse engineered in order to make better use of
         its internal services and APIs. Chapter 6 demonstrates how to decipher
         an undocumented, proprietary file-format by applying data reverse
         engineering techniques. Chapter 7 demonstrates how vulnerability
         researchers can look for vulnerabilities in binary executables using
         reverse engineering techniques. Finally, chapter 8 discusses malicious
         software such as viruses and worms and provides an introduction to this
         topic. This chapter also demonstrates a real reverse engineering session
         on a real-world malicious program, which is exactly what malware
         researches must often go through in order to study malicious programs,
         evaluate the risks they pose, and learn how to eliminate them.
       Part III – Piracy and Copy Protection: This part focuses on the reverse
         engineering of certain types of security-related code such as copy protec-
         tion and Digital Rights Management (DRM) technologies. Chapter 9
         introduces the subject and discusses the general principals behind copy
         protection technologies. Chapter 10 describes anti-reverse-engineering
         techniques such as those typically employed in copy-protection and
         DRM technologies and evaluates their effectiveness. Chapter 11 demon-
         strates how reverse engineering is applied by “crackers” to defeat copy
         protection mechanisms and steal copy-protected content.
       Part IV – Beyond Disassembly: The final part of this book contains materi-
         als that go beyond simple disassembly of executable programs. Chapter
         12 discusses the reverse engineering process for virtual-machine based
         programs written under the Microsoft .NET development platform. The
         chapter provides an introduction to the .NET platform and its low-level
         assembly language, MSIL (Microsoft Intermediate Language). Chapter
         13 discusses the more theoretical topic of decompilation, and explains
         how decompilers work and why decompiling native assembly-language
         code can be so challenging.
                                                                   Introduction xxvii

  Appendixes: The book has three appendixes that serve as a powerful refer-
   ence when attempting to decipher programs written in Intel IA-32
   assembly language. Far beyond a mere assembly language reference
   guide, these appendixes describe the common code fragments and com-
   piler idioms emitted by popular compilers in response to typical code
   sequences, and how to identify and decipher them.

Who Should Read this Book
This book exposes techniques that can benefit people from a variety of fields.
Software developers interested in improving their understanding of various
low-level aspects of software: operating systems, assembly language, compila-
tion, etc. would certainly benefit. More importantly, anyone interested in
developing techniques that would enable them to quickly and effectively
research and investigate existing code, whether it’s an operating system, a
software library, or any software component. Beyond the techniques taught,
this book also provides a fascinating journey through many subjects such as
security, copyright control, and others. Even if you’re not specifically inter-
ested in reverse engineering but find one or more of the sub-topics interesting,
you’re likely to benefit from this book.
   In terms of pre-requisites, this book deals with some fairly advanced techni-
cal materials, and I’ve tried to make it as self-contained as possible. Most of the
required basics are explained in the first part of the book. Still, a certain
amount of software development knowledge and experience would be essen-
tial in order to truly benefit from this book. If you don’t have any professional
software development experience but are currently in the process of studying
the topic, you’ll probably get by. Conversely, if you’ve never officially studied
computers but have been programming for a couple of years, you’ll probably
be able to benefit from this book.
   Finally, this book is probably going to be helpful for more advanced readers
who are already experienced with low-level software and reverse engineering
who would like to learn some interesting advanced techniques and how to
extract remarkably detailed information from existing code.

Tools and Platforms
Reverse engineering revolves around a variety of tools which are required in
order to get the job done. Many of these tools are introduced and discussed
throughout this book, and I’ve intentionally based most of my examples on free
tools, so that readers can follow along without having to shell out thousands of
xxviii Introduction

     dollars on tools. Still, in some cases massive reverse engineering projects can
     greatly benefit from some of these expensive products. I have tried to provide
     as much information as possible on every relevant tool and to demonstrate the
     effect it has on the process. Eventually it will be up to the reader to decide
     whether or not the project justifies the expense.
        Reverse engineering is often platform-specific. It is affected by the specific
     operating system and hardware platform used. The primary operating system
     used throughout this book is Microsoft Windows, and for a good reason. Win-
     dows is the most popular reverse engineering environment, and not only
     because it is the most popular operating system in general. Its lovely open-
     source alternative Linux, for example, is far less relevant from a reversing
     standpoint precisely because the operating system and most of the software
     that runs on top of it are open-source. There’s no point in reversing open-
     source products—just read the source-code, or better yet, ask the original
     developer for answers. There are no secrets.

     What’s on the Web Site
     The book’s website can be visited at http://www.wiley.com/go/eeilam, and
     contains the sample programs investigated throughout the book. I’ve also
     added links to various papers, products, and online resources discussed
     throughout the book.

     Where to Go from Here?
     This book was designed to be read continuously, from start to finish. Of
     course, some people would benefit more from reading only select chapters of
     interest. In terms of where to start, regardless of your background, I would rec-
     ommend that you visit Chapter 1 to make sure you have all the basic reverse
     engineering related materials covered. If you haven’t had any significant
     reverse engineering or low-level software experience I would strongly recom-
     mend that you read this book in its “natural” order, at least the first two parts
     of it.
        If you are highly experienced and feel like you are sufficiently familiar with
     software development and operating systems, you should probably skip to
     Chapter 4 and go over the reverse engineering tools.
         PA R T

           I
Reversing 101
                                                                CHAPTER

                                                                     1

                                                  Foundations

This chapter provides some background information on reverse engineering
and the various topics discussed throughout this book. We start by defining
reverse engineering and the various types of applications it has in software,
and proceed to demonstrate the connection between low-level software and
reverse engineering. There is then a brief introduction of the reverse-engineering
process and the tools of the trade. Finally, there is a discussion on the legal
aspects of reverse engineering with an attempt to classify the cases in which
reverse engineering is legal and when it’s not.

What Is Reverse Engineering?
Reverse engineering is the process of extracting the knowledge or design blue-
prints from anything man-made. The concept has been around since long
before computers or modern technology, and probably dates back to the days
of the industrial revolution. It is very similar to scientific research, in which a
researcher is attempting to work out the “blueprint” of the atom or the human
mind. The difference between reverse engineering and conventional scientific
research is that with reverse engineering the artifact being investigated is man-
made, unlike scientific research where it is a natural phenomenon.
   Reverse engineering is usually conducted to obtain missing knowledge,
ideas, and design philosophy when such information is unavailable. In some

    cases, the information is owned by someone who isn’t willing to share them.
    In other cases, the information has been lost or destroyed.
       Traditionally, reverse engineering has been about taking shrink-wrapped
    products and physically dissecting them to uncover the secrets of their design.
    Such secrets were then typically used to make similar or better products. In
    many industries, reverse engineering involves examining the product under a
    microscope or taking it apart and figuring out what each piece does.
       Not too long ago, reverse engineering was actually a fairly popular hobby,
    practiced by a large number of people (even if it wasn’t referred to as reverse
    engineering). Remember how in the early days of modern electronics, many
    people were so amazed by modern appliances such as the radio and television
    set that it became common practice to take them apart and see what goes on
    inside? That was reverse engineering. Of course, advances in the electronics
    industry have made this practice far less relevant. Modern digital electronics
    are so miniaturized that nowadays you really wouldn’t be able to see much of
    the interesting stuff by just opening the box.

    Software Reverse Engineering: Reversing
    Software is one of the most complex and intriguing technologies around us
    nowadays, and software reverse engineering is about opening up a program’s
    “box,” and looking inside. Of course, we won’t need any screwdrivers on this
    journey. Just like software engineering, software reverse engineering is a
    purely virtual process, involving only a CPU, and the human mind.
       Software reverse engineering requires a combination of skills and a thor-
    ough understanding of computers and software development, but like most
    worthwhile subjects, the only real prerequisite is a strong curiosity and desire
    to learn. Software reverse engineering integrates several arts: code breaking,
    puzzle solving, programming, and logical analysis.
       The process is used by a variety of different people for a variety of different
    purposes, many of which will be discussed throughout this book.

    Reversing Applications
    It would be fair to say that in most industries reverse engineering for the pur-
    pose of developing competing products is the most well-known application of
    reverse engineering. The interesting thing is that it really isn’t as popular in the
    software industry as one would expect. There are several reasons for this, but
    it is primarily because software is so complex that in many cases reverse engi-
    neering for competitive purposes is thought to be such a complex process that
    it just doesn’t make sense financially.

  So what are the common applications of reverse engineering in the software
world? Generally speaking, there are two categories of reverse engineering
applications: security-related and software development–related. The follow-
ing sections present the various reversing applications in both categories.

Security-Related Reversing
For some people the connection between security and reversing might not be
immediately clear. Reversing is related to several different aspects of computer
security. For example, reversing has been employed in encryption research—a
researcher reverses an encryption product and evaluates the level of security it
provides. Reversing is also heavily used in connection with malicious soft-
ware, on both ends of the fence: it is used by both malware developers and
those developing the antidotes. Finally, reversing is very popular with crack-
ers who use it to analyze and eventually defeat various copy protection
schemes. All of these applications are discussed in the sections that follow.

Malicious Software
The Internet has completely changed the computer industry in general and the
security-related aspects of computing in particular. Malicious software, such
as viruses and worms, spreads so much faster in a world where millions of
users are connected to the Internet and use e-mail daily. Just 10 years ago, a
virus would usually have to copy itself to a diskette and that diskette would
have to be loaded into another computer in order for the virus to spread. The
infection process was fairly slow, and defense was much simpler because the
channels of infection were few and required human intervention for the pro-
gram to spread. That is all ancient history—the Internet has created a virtual
connection between almost every computer on earth. Nowadays modern
worms can spread automatically to millions of computers without any human
intervention.
   Reversing is used extensively in both ends of the malicious software chain.
Developers of malicious software often use reversing to locate vulnerabilities
in operating systems and other software. Such vulnerabilities can be used to
penetrate the system’s defense layers and allow infection—usually over the
Internet. Beyond infection, culprits sometimes employ reversing techniques to
locate software vulnerabilities that allow a malicious program to gain access to
sensitive information or even take full control of the system.
   At the other end of the chain, developers of antivirus software dissect and
analyze every malicious program that falls into their hands. They use revers-
ing techniques to trace every step the program takes and assess the damage it
could cause, the expected rate of infection, how it could be removed from
infected systems, and whether infection can be avoided altogether. Chapter 8

    serves as an introduction to the world of malicious software and demonstrates
    how reversing is used by antivirus program writers. Chapter 7 demonstrates
    how software vulnerabilities can be located using reversing techniques.

    Reversing Cryptographic Algorithms
    Cryptography has always been based on secrecy: Alice sends a message to
    Bob, and encrypts that message using a secret that is (hopefully) only known
    to her and Bob. Cryptographic algorithms can be roughly divided into two
    groups: restricted algorithms and key-based algorithms. Restricted algorithms
    are the kind some kids play with; writing a letter to a friend with each letter
    shifted several letters up or down. The secret in restricted algorithms is the
    algorithm itself. Once the algorithm is exposed, it is no longer secure.
    Restricted algorithms provide very poor security because reversing makes it
    very difficult to maintain the secrecy of the algorithm. Once reversers get their
    hands on the encrypting or decrypting program, it is only a matter of time
    before the algorithm is exposed. Because the algorithm is the secret, reversing
    can be seen as a way to break the algorithm.
       On the other hand, in key-based algorithms, the secret is a key, some
    numeric value that is used by the algorithm to encrypt and decrypt the mes-
    sage. In key-based algorithms users encrypt messages using keys that are kept
    private. The algorithms are usually made public, and the keys are kept private
    (and sometimes divulged to the legitimate recipient, depending on the algo-
    rithm). This almost makes reversing pointless because the algorithm is already
    known. In order to decipher a message encrypted with a key-based cipher, you
    would have to either:
      ■■   Obtain the key
      ■■   Try all possible combinations until you get to the key
      ■■   Look for a flaw in the algorithm that can be employed to extract the key
           or the original message
    Still, there are cases where it makes sense to reverse engineer private imple-
    mentations of key-based ciphers. Even when the encryption algorithm is well-
    known, specific implementation details can often have an unexpected impact
    on the overall level of security offered by a program. Encryption algorithms
    are delicate, and minor implementation errors can sometimes completely
    invalidate the level of security offered by such algorithms. The only way to
    really know for sure whether a security product that implements an encryp-
    tion algorithm is truly secure is to either go through its source code (assuming
    it is available), or to reverse it.

Digital Rights Management
Modern computers have turned most types of copyrighted materials into dig-
ital information. Music, films, and even books, which were once only available
on physical analog mediums, are now available digitally. This trend is a mixed
blessing, providing huge benefits to consumers, and huge complications to
copyright owners and content providers. For consumers, it means that materi-
als have increased in quality, and become easily accessible and simple to man-
age. For providers, it has enabled the distribution of high-quality content at
low cost, but more importantly, it has made controlling the flow of such con-
tent an impossible mission.
   Digital information is incredibly fluid. It is very easy to move around and
can be very easily duplicated. This fluidity means that once the copyrighted
materials reach the hands of consumers, they can be moved and duplicated so
easily that piracy almost becomes common practice. Traditionally, software
companies have dealt with piracy by embedding copy protection technologies
into their software. These are additional pieces of software embedded on top
of the vendor’s software product that attempt to prevent or restrict users from
copying the program.
   In recent years, as digital media became a reality, media content providers
have developed or acquired technologies that control the distribution of
content such as music, movies, etc. These technologies are collectively called
digital rights management (DRM) technologies. DRM technologies are concep-
tually very similar to traditional software copy protection technologies dis-
cussed above. The difference is that with software, the thing which is being
protected is active or “intelligent,” and can decide whether to make itself avail-
able or not. Digital media is a passive element that is usually played or read by
another program, making it more difficult to control or restrict usage. Through-
out this book I will use the term DRM to describe both types of technologies
and specifically refer to media or software DRM technologies where relevant.
   This topic is highly related to reverse engineering because crackers rou-
tinely use reverse-engineering techniques while attempting to defeat DRM
technologies. The reason for this is that to defeat a DRM technology one must
understand how it works. By using reversing techniques a cracker can learn
the inner secrets of the technology and discover the simplest possible modifi-
cation that could be made to the program in order to disable the protection. I
will be discussing the subject of DRM technologies and how they relate to
reversing in more depth in Part III.

Auditing Program Binaries
One of the strengths of open-source software is that it is often inherently more
dependable and secure. Regardless of the real security it provides, it just feels

    much safer to run software that has often been inspected and approved by
    thousands of impartial software engineers. Needless to say, open-source soft-
    ware also provides some real, tangible quality benefits. With open-source soft-
    ware, having open access to the program’s source code means that certain
    vulnerabilities and security holes can be discovered very early on, often before
    malicious programs can take advantage of them. With proprietary software for
    which source code is unavailable, reversing becomes a viable (yet admittedly
    limited) alternative for searching for security vulnerabilities. Of course,
    reverse engineering cannot make proprietary software nearly as accessible
    and readable as open-source software, but strong reversing skills enable one to
    view code and assess the various security risks it poses. I will be demonstrat-
    ing this kind of reverse engineering in Chapter 7.

    Reversing in Software Development
    Reversing can be incredibly useful to software developers. For instance, soft-
    ware developers can employ reversing techniques to discover how to interop-
    erate with undocumented or partially documented software. In other cases,
    reversing can be used to determine the quality of third-party code, such as a
    code library or even an operating system. Finally, it is sometimes possible to
    use reversing techniques for extracting valuable information from a competi-
    tor’s product for the purpose of improving your own technologies. The appli-
    cations of reversing in software development are discussed in the following
    sections.

    Achieving Interoperability with Proprietary Software
    Interoperability is where most software engineers can benefit from reversing
    almost daily. When working with a proprietary software library or operating
    system API, documentation is almost always insufficient. Regardless of how
    much trouble the library vendor has taken to ensure that all possible cases are
    covered in the documentation, users almost always find themselves scratching
    their heads with unanswered questions. Most developers will either be persis-
    tent and keep trying to somehow get things to work, or contact the vendor for
    answers. On the other hand, those with reversing skills will often find it
    remarkably easy to deal with such situations. Using reversing it is possible to
    resolve many of these problems in very little time and with a relatively small
    effort. Chapters 5 and 6 demonstrate several different applications for revers-
    ing in the context of achieving interoperability.

    Developing Competing Software
    As I’ve already mentioned, in most industries this is by far the most popular
    application of reverse engineering. Software tends to be more complex than

most products, and so reversing an entire software product in order to create a
competing product just doesn’t make any sense. It is usually much easier to
design and develop a product from scratch, or simply license the more com-
plex components from a third party rather than develop them in-house. In the
software industry, even if a competitor has an unpatented technology (and I’ll
get into patent/trade-secret issues later in this chapter), it would never make
sense to reverse engineer their entire product. It is almost always easier to
independently develop your own software. The exception is highly complex
or unique designs/algorithms that are very difficult or costly to develop. In
such cases, most of the application would still have to be developed indepen-
dently, but highly complex or unusual components might be reversed and
reimplemented in the new product. The legal aspects of this type of reverse
engineering are discussed in the legal section later in this chapter.

Evaluating Software Quality and Robustness
Just as it is possible to audit a program binary to evaluate its security and vul-
nerability, it is also possible to try and sample a program binary in order to get
an estimate of the general quality of the coding practices used in the program.
The need is very similar: open-source software is an open book that allows its
users to evaluate its quality before committing to it. Software vendors that
don’t publish their software’s source code are essentially asking their cus-
tomers to “just trust them.” It’s like buying a used car where you just can’t pop
up the hood. You have no idea what you are really buying.
   The need for having source-code access to key software products such as
operating systems has been made clear by large corporations; several years
ago Microsoft announced that large customers purchasing over 1,000 seats
may obtain access to the Windows source code for evaluation purposes. Those
who lack the purchasing power to convince a major corporation to grant them
access to the product’s source code must either take the company’s word that
the product is well built, or resort to reversing. Again, reversing would never
reveal as much about the product’s code quality and overall reliability as tak-
ing a look at the source code, but it can be highly informative. There are no spe-
cial techniques required here. As soon as you are comfortable enough with
reversing that you can fairly quickly go over binary code, you can use that
ability to try and evaluate its quality. This book provides everything you need
to do that.

Low-Level Software
Low-level software (also known as system software) is a generic name for the infra-
structure of the software world. It encompasses development tools such as
compilers, linkers, and debuggers, infrastructure software such as operating

     systems, and low-level programming languages such as assembly language. It
     is the layer that isolates software developers and application programs from
     the physical hardware. The development tools isolate software developers
     from processor architectures and assembly languages, while operating systems
     isolate software developers from specific hardware devices and simplify the
     interaction with the end user by managing the display, the mouse, the key-
     board, and so on.
        Years ago, programmers always had to work at this low level because it was
     the only possible way to write software—the low-level infrastructure just
     didn’t exist. Nowadays, modern operating systems and development tools
     aim at isolating us from the details of the low-level world. This greatly simpli-
     fies the process of software development, but comes at the cost of reduced
     power and control over the system.
        In order to become an accomplished reverse engineer, you must develop a
     solid understanding of low-level software and low-level programming. That’s
     because the low-level aspects of a program are often the only thing you have to
     work with as a reverser—high-level details are almost always eliminated before
     a software program is shipped to customers. Mastering low-level software and
     the various software-engineering concepts is just as important as mastering the
     actual reversing techniques if one is to become an accomplished reverser.
        A key concept about reversing that will become painfully clear later in this
     book is that reversing tools such as disassemblers or decompilers never actu-
     ally provide the answers—they merely present the information. Eventually, it
     is always up to the reverser to extract anything meaningful from that informa-
     tion. In order to successfully extract information during a reversing session,
     reversers must understand the various aspects of low-level software.
        So, what exactly is low-level software? Computers and software are built
     layers upon layers. At the bottom layer, there are millions of microscopic tran-
     sistors pulsating at incomprehensible speeds. At the top layer, there are some
     elegant looking graphics, a keyboard, and a mouse—the user experience. Most
     software developers use high-level languages that take easily understandable
     commands and execute them. For instance, commands that create a window,
     load a Web page, or display a picture are incredibly high-level, meaning that
     they translate to thousands or even millions of commands in the lower layers.
        Reversing requires a solid understanding of these lower layers. Reversers
     must literally be aware of anything that comes between the program source
     code and the CPU. The following sections introduce those aspects of low-level
     software that are mandatory for successful reversing.

     Assembly Language
     Assembly language is the lowest level in the software chain, which makes it
     incredibly suitable for reversing—nothing moves without it. If software per-
     forms an operation, it must be visible in the assembly language code. Assembly
