
language is the language of reversing. To master the world of reversing, one
must develop a solid understanding of the chosen platform’s assembly lan-
guage. Which bring us to the most basic point to remember about assembly lan-
guage: it is a class of languages, not one language. Every computer platform
has its own assembly language that is usually quite different from all the rest.
   Another important concept to get out of the way is machine code (often called
binary code, or object code). People sometimes make the mistake of thinking that
machine code is “faster” or “lower-level” than assembly language. That is a
misconception: machine code and assembly language are two different repre-
sentations of the same thing. A CPU reads machine code, which is nothing but
sequences of bits that contain a list of instructions for the CPU to perform.
Assembly language is simply a textual representation of those bits—we name
elements in these code sequences in order to make them human-readable.
Instead of cryptic hexadecimal numbers we can look at textual instruction
names such as MOV (Move), XCHG (Exchange), and so on.
   Each assembly language command is represented by a number, called the
operation code, or opcode. Object code is essentially a sequence of opcodes and
other numbers used in connection with the opcodes to perform operations.
CPUs constantly read object code from memory, decode it, and act based on
the instructions embedded in it. When developers write code in assembly lan-
guage (a fairly rare occurrence these days), they use an assembler program to
translate the textual assembly language code into binary code, which can be
decoded by a CPU. In the other direction and more relevant to our narrative, a
disassembler does the exact opposite. It reads object code and generates the tex-
tual mapping of each instruction in it. This is a relatively simple operation to
perform because the textual assembly language is simply a different represen-
tation of the object code. Disassemblers are a key tool for reversers and are dis-
cussed in more depth later in this chapter.
   Because assembly language is a platform-specific affair, we need to choose a
specific platform to focus on while studying the language and practicing
reversing. I’ve decided to focus on the Intel IA-32 architecture, on which every
32-bit PC is based. This choice is an easy one to make, considering the popu-
larity of PCs and of this architecture. IA-32 is one of the most common CPU
architectures in the world, and if you’re planning on learning reversing and
assembly language and have no specific platform in mind, go with IA-32. The
architecture and assembly language of IA-32-based CPUs are introduced in
Chapter 2.

Compilers
So, considering that the CPU can only run machine code, how are the popular
programming languages such as C++ and Java translated into machine code?
A text file containing instructions that describe the program in a high-level
language is fed into a compiler. A compiler is a program that takes a source file

     and generates a corresponding machine code file. Depending on the high-level
     language, this machine code can either be a standard platform-specific object
     code that is decoded directly by the CPU or it can be encoded in a special plat-
     form-independent format called bytecode (see the following section on byte-
     codes).
        Compilers of traditional (non-bytecode-based) programming languages
     such as C and C++ directly generate machine-readable object code from the
     textual source code. What this means is that the resulting object code, when
     translated to assembly language by a disassembler, is essentially a machine-
     generated assembly language program. Of course, it is not entirely machine-
     generated, because the software developer described to the compiler what
     needed to be done in the high-level language. But the details of how things are
     carried out are taken care of by the compiler, in the resulting object code. This
     is an important point because this code is not always easily understandable,
     even when compared to a man-made assembly language program—machines
     think differently than human beings.
        The biggest hurdle in deciphering compiler-generated code is the optimiza-
     tions applied by most modern compilers. Compilers employ a variety of tech-
     niques that minimize code size and improve execution performance. The
     problem is that the resulting optimized code is often counterintuitive and dif-
     ficult to read. For instance, optimizing compilers often replace straightforward
     instructions with mathematically equivalent operations whose purpose can be
     far from obvious at first glance.
        Significant portions of this book are dedicated to the art of deciphering
     machine-generated assembly language. We will be studying some compiler
     basics in Chapter 2 and proceed to specific techniques that can be used to
     extract meaningful information from compiler-generated code.

     Virtual Machines and Bytecodes
     Compilers for high-level languages such as Java generate a bytecode instead of
     an object code. Bytecodes are similar to object codes, except that they are usu-
     ally decoded by a program, instead of a CPU. The idea is to have a compiler
     generate the bytecode, and to then use a program called a virtual machine to
     decode the bytecode and perform the operations described in it. Of course, the
     virtual machine itself must at some point convert the bytecode into standard
     object code that is compatible with the underlying CPU.
        There are several major benefits to using bytecode-based languages. One
     significant advantage is platform independence. The virtual machine can be
     ported to different platforms, which enables running the same binary program
     on any CPU as long as it has a compatible virtual machine. Of course, regard-
     less of which platform the virtual machine is currently running on, the byte-
     code format stays the same. This means that theoretically software developers

don’t need to worry about platform compatibility. All they must do is provide
their customers with a bytecode version of their program. Customers must in
turn obtain a virtual machine that is compatible with both the specific byte-
code language and with their specific platform. The program should then (in
theory at least) run on the user’s platform with no modifications or platform-
specific work.
   This book primarily focuses on reverse engineering of native executable
programs generated by native machine code compilers. Reversing programs
written in bytecode-based languages is an entirely different process that is
often much simpler compared to the process of reversing native executables.
Chapter 12 focuses on reversing techniques for programs written for
Microsoft’s .NET platform, which uses a virtual machine and a low-level byte-
code language.

Operating Systems
An operating system is a program that manages the computer, including the
hardware and software applications. An operating system takes care of many
different tasks and can be seen as a kind of coordinator between the different
elements in a computer. Operating systems are such a key element in a com-
puter that any reverser must have a good understanding of what they do and
how they work. As we’ll see later on, many reversing techniques revolve
around the operating system because the operating system serves as a gate-
keeper that controls the link between applications and the outside world.
Chapter 3 provides an introduction to modern operating system architectures
and operating system internals, and demonstrates the connection between
operating systems and reverse-engineering techniques.

The Reversing Process
How does one begin reversing? There are really many different approaches
that work, and I’ll try to discuss as many of them as possible throughout this
book. For starters, I usually try to divide reversing sessions into two separate
phases. The first, which is really a kind of large-scale observation of the earlier
program, is called system-level reversing. System-level reversing techniques
help determine the general structure of the program and sometimes even
locate areas of interest within it. Once you establish a general understanding of
the layout of the program and determine areas of special interest within it you
can proceed to more in-depth work using code-level reversing techniques. Code-
level techniques provide detailed information on a selected code chunk. The
following sections describe each of the two techniques.

     System-Level Reversing
     System-level reversing involves running various tools on the program and uti-
     lizing various operating system services to obtain information, inspect pro-
     gram executables, track program input and output, and so forth. Most of this
     information comes from the operating system, because by definition every
     interaction that a program has with the outside world must go through the
     operating system. This is the reason why reversers must understand operating
     systems—they can be used during reversing sessions to obtain a wealth of
     information about the target program being investigated. I will be discussing
     operating system basics in Chapter 3 and proceed to introduce the various
     tools commonly used for system-level reversing in Chapter 4.

     Code-Level Reversing
     Code-level reversing is really an art form. Extracting design concepts and
     algorithms from a program binary is a complex process that requires a mastery
     of reversing techniques along with a solid understanding of software develop-
     ment, the CPU, and the operating system. Software can be highly complex,
     and even those with access to a program’s well-written and properly-docu-
     mented source code are often amazed at how difficult it can be to comprehend.
     Deciphering the sequences of low-level instructions that make up a program is
     usually no mean feat. But fear not, the focus of this book is to provide you with
     the knowledge, tools, and techniques needed to perform effective code-level
     reversing.
        Before covering any actual techniques, you must become familiar with some
     software-engineering essentials. Code-level reversing observes the code from
     a very low-level, and we’ll be seeing every little detail of how the software
     operates. Many of these details are generated automatically by the compiler
     and not manually by the software developer, which sometimes makes it diffi-
     cult to understand how they relate to the program and to its functionality. That
     is why reversing requires a solid understanding of the low-level aspects of
     software, including the link between high-level and low-level programming
     constructs, assembly language, and the inner workings of compilers. These
     topics are discussed in Chapter 2.

     The Tools
     Reversing is all about the tools. The following sections describe the basic cate-
     gories of tools that are used in reverse engineering. Many of these tools were
     not specifically created as reversing tools, but can be quite useful nonetheless.
     Chapter 4 provides an in-depth discussion of the various types of tools and

introduces the specific tools that will be used throughout this book. Let’s take
a brief look at the different types of tools you will be dealing with.

System-Monitoring Tools
System-level reversing requires a variety of tools that sniff, monitor, explore,
and otherwise expose the program being reversed. Most of these tools display
information gathered by the operating system about the application and its
environment. Because almost all communications between a program and the
outside world go through the operating system, the operating system can usu-
ally be leveraged to extract such information. System-monitoring tools can
monitor networking activity, file accesses, registry access, and so on. There are
also tools that expose a program’s use of operating system objects such as
mutexes, pipes, events, and so forth. Many of these tools will be discussed in
Chapter 4 and throughout this book.

Disassemblers
As I described earlier, disassemblers are programs that take a program’s exe-
cutable binary as input and generate textual files that contain the assembly
language code for the entire program or parts of it. This is a relatively simple
process considering that assembly language code is simply the textual map-
ping of the object code. Disassembly is a processor-specific process, but some
disassemblers support multiple CPU architectures. A high-quality disassem-
bler is a key component in a reverser’s toolkit, yet some reversers prefer to just
use the built-in disassemblers that are embedded in certain low-level debug-
gers (described next).

Debuggers
If you’ve ever attempted even the simplest software development, you’ve
most likely used a debugger. The basic idea behind a debugger is that pro-
grammers can’t really envision everything their program can do. Programs are
usually just too complex for a human to really predict every single potential
outcome. A debugger is a program that allows software developers to observe
their program while it is running. The two most basic features in a debugger
are the ability to set breakpoints and the ability to trace through code.
   Breakpoints allow users to select a certain function or code line anywhere in
the program and instruct the debugger to pause program execution once that
line is reached. When the program reaches the breakpoint, the debugger stops
(breaks) and displays the current state of the program. At that point, it is pos-
sible to either release the debugger and the program will continue running or
to start tracing through the program.

        Debuggers allow users to trace through a program while it is running (this
     is also known as single-stepping). Tracing means the program executes one
     line of code and then freezes, allowing the user to observe or even alter the
     program’s state. The user can then execute the next line and repeat the process.
     This allows developers to view the exact flow of a program at a pace more
     appropriate for human comprehension, which is about a billion times slower
     than the pace the program usually runs in.
        By installing breakpoints and tracing through programs, developers can
     watch a program closely as it executes a problematic section of code and try to
     determine the source of the problem. Because developers have access to the
     source code of their program, debuggers present the program in source-code
     form, and allow developers to set breakpoints and trace through source
     lines, even though the debugger is actually working with the machine code
     underneath.
        For a reverser, the debugger is almost as important as it is to a software
     developer, but for slightly different reasons. First and foremost, reversers use
     debuggers in disassembly mode. In disassembly mode, a debugger uses a
     built-in disassembler to disassemble object code on the fly. Reversers can step
     through the disassembled code and essentially “watch” the CPU as it’s run-
     ning the program one instruction at a time. Just as with the source-level
     debugging performed by software developers, reversers can install break-
     points in locations of interest in the disassembled code and then examine the
     state of the program. For some reversing tasks, the only thing you are going to
     need is a good debugger with good built-in disassembly capabilities. Being
     able to step through the code and watch as it is executed is really an invaluable
     element in the reversing process.

     Decompilers
     Decompilers are the next step up from disassemblers. A decompiler takes an
     executable binary file and attempts to produce readable high-level language
     code from it. The idea is to try and reverse the compilation process, to obtain
     the original source file or something similar to it. On the vast majority of plat-
     forms, actual recovery of the original source code isn’t really possible. There
     are significant elements in most high-level languages that are just omitted dur-
     ing the compilation process and are impossible to recover. Still, decompilers
     are powerful tools that in some situations and environments can reconstruct a
     highly readable source code from a program binary. Chapter 13 discusses the
     process of decompilation and its limitations, and demonstrates just how effec-
     tive it can be.

Is Reversing Legal?
The legal debate around reverse engineering has been going on for years. It
usually revolves around the question of what social and economic impact
reverse engineering has on society as a whole. Of course, calculating this kind
of impact largely depends on what reverse engineering is used for. The fol-
lowing sections discuss the legal aspects of the various applications of reverse
engineering, with an emphasis on the United States.
   It should be noted that it is never going to be possible to accurately predict
beforehand whether a particular reversing scenario is going to be considered
legal or not—that depends on many factors. Always seek legal counsel before
getting yourself into any high-risk reversing project. The following sections
should provide general guidelines on what types of scenarios should be con-
sidered high risk.

Interoperability
Getting two programs to communicate and interoperate is never an easy task.
Even within a single product developed by a single group of people, there are
frequently interfacing issues caused when attempting to get individual com-
ponents to interoperate. Software interfaces are so complex and the programs
are so sensitive that these things rarely function properly on the first attempt.
It is just the nature of the technology. When a software developer wishes to
develop software that communicates with a component developed by another
company, there are large amounts of information that must be exposed by the
other party regarding the interfaces.
   A software platform is any program or hardware device that programs can
run on top of. For example, both Microsoft Windows and Sony Playstation are
software platforms. For a software platform developer, the decision of whether
to publish or to not publish the details of the platform’s software interfaces is
a critical one. On one hand, exposing software interfaces means that other
developers will be able to develop software that runs on top of the platform.
This could drive sales of the platform upward, but the vendor might also be
offering their own software that runs on the platform. Publishing software
interfaces would also create new competition for the vendor’s own applica-
tions. The various legal aspects that affect this type of reverse engineering such
as copyright laws, trade secret protections, and patents are discussed in the
following sections.

       SEGA VERSUS ACCOLADE

       In 1990 Sega Enterprises, a well-known Japanese gaming company, released
       their Genesis gaming console. The Genesis’s programming interfaces were not
       published. The idea was for Sega and their licensed affiliates to be the only
       developers of games for the console. Accolade, a California-based game
       developer, was interested in developing new games for the Sega Genesis and in
       porting some of their existing games to the Genesis platform. Accolade
       explored the option of becoming a Sega licensee, but quickly abandoned the
       idea because Sega required that all games be exclusively manufactured for the
       Genesis console. Instead of becoming a Sega licensee Accolade decided to use
       reverse engineering to obtain the details necessary to port their games to the
       Genesis platform. Accolade reverse engineered portions of the Genesis console
       and several of Sega’s game cartridges. Accolade engineers then used the
       information gathered in these reverse-engineering sessions to produce a
       document that described their findings. This internal document was essentially
       the missing documentation describing how to develop games for the Sega
       Genesis console. Accolade successfully developed and sold several games for
       the Genesis platform, and in October of 1991 was sued by Sega for copyright
       infringement. The primary claim made by Sega was that copies made by
       Accolade during the reverse-engineering process (known as “intermediate
       copying”) violated copyright laws. The court eventually ruled in Accolade’s favor
       because Accolade’s games didn’t actually contain any of Sega’s code, and
       because of the public benefit resulting from Accolade’s work (by way of
       introducing additional competition in the market). This was an important
       landmark in the legal history of reverse engineering because in this ruling the
       court essentially authorized reverse engineering for the purpose of
       interoperability.

     Competition
     When used for interoperability, reverse engineering clearly benefits society
     because it simplifies (or enables) the development of new and improved tech-
     nologies. When reverse engineering is used in the development of competing
     products, the situation is slightly more complicated. Opponents of reverse
     engineering usually claim that reversing stifles innovation because developers
     of new technologies have little incentive to invest in research and develop-
     ment if their technologies can be easily “stolen” by competitors through
     reverse engineering. This brings us to the question of what exactly constitutes
     reverse engineering for the purpose of developing a competing product.
        The most extreme example is to directly steal code segments from a competi-
     tor’s product and embed them into your own. This is a clear violation of copy-
     right laws and is typically very easy to prove. A more complicated example is

to apply some kind of decompilation process to a program and recompile its
output in a way that generates a binary with identical functionality but with
seemingly different code. This is similar to the previous example, except that in
this case it might be far more difficult to prove that code had actually been
stolen.
   Finally, a more relevant (and ethical) kind of reverse engineering in a com-
peting product situation is one where reverse engineering is applied only to
small parts of a product and is only used for the gathering of information, and
not code. In these cases most of the product is developed independently with-
out any use of reverse engineering and only the most complex and unique
areas of the competitor’s product are reverse engineered and reimplemented
in the new product.

Copyright Law
Copyright laws aim to protect software and other intellectual property from
any kind of unauthorized duplication, and so on. The best example of where
copyright laws apply to reverse engineering is in the development of compet-
ing software. As I described earlier, in software there is a very fine line
between directly stealing a competitor’s code and reimplementing it. One
thing that is generally considered a violation of copyright law is to directly
copy protected code sequences from a competitor’s product into your own
product, but there are other, far more indefinite cases.
   How does copyright law affect the process of reverse engineering a com-
petitor’s code for the purpose of reimplementing it in your own product? In
the past, opponents of reverse engineering have claimed that this process vio-
lates copyright law because of the creation of intermediate copies during the
reverse-engineering process. Consider the decompilation of a program as an
example. In order to decompile a program, that program must be duplicated
at least once, either in memory, on disk, or both. The idea is that even if the
actual decompilation is legal, this intermediate copying violates copyright law.
However, this claim has not held up in courts; there have been several cases
including Sega v. Accolade and Sony v. Connectix, where intermediate copying
was considered fair use, primarily because the final product did not actually
contain anything that was directly copied from the original product.
   From a technological perspective, this makes perfect sense—intermediate
copies are always created while software is being used, regardless of reverse
engineering. Consider what happens when a program is installed from an
optical media such as a DVD-ROM onto a hard-drive—a copy of the software
is made. This happens again when that program is launched—the executable
file on disk is duplicated into memory in order for the code to be executed.

     Trade Secrets and Patents
     When a new technology is developed, developers are usually faced with two
     primary options for protecting the unique aspects of it. In some cases, filing a
     patent is the right choice. The benefit of patenting is that it grants the inventor
     or patent owner control of the invention for up to almost 20 years. The main
     catches for the inventor are that the details of the invention must be published
     and that after the patent expires the invention essentially becomes public
     domain. Of course, reverse engineering of patented technologies doesn’t make
     any sense because the information is publicly available anyway.
       A newly developed technology that isn’t patented automatically receives
     the legal protection of a trade secret if significant efforts are put into its devel-
     opment and to keeping it confidential. A trade secret legally protects the devel-
     oper from cases of “trade-secret misappropriation” such as having a rogue
     employee sell the secret to a competitor. However, a product’s being a trade
     secret does not protect its owner in cases where a competitor reverse engineers
     the owner’s product, assuming that product is available on the open market
     and is obtained legitimately. Having a trade secret also offers no protection in
     the case of a competitor independently inventing the same technology—that’s
     exactly what patents are for.

     The Digital Millenium Copyright Act
     The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) has been getting much pub-
     licity these past few years. As funny as it may sound, the basic purpose of the
     DMCA, which was enacted in 1998, is to protect the copyright protection tech-
     nologies. The idea is that the copyright protection technologies in themselves
     are vulnerable and that legislative action must be taken to protect them. Seri-
     ously, the basic idea behind the DMCA is that it legally protects copyright pro-
     tection systems from circumvention. Of course, “circumvention of copyright
     protection systems” almost always involves reversing, and that is why the
     DMCA is the closest thing you’ll find in the United States Code to an anti-
     reverse-engineering law. However, it should be stressed that the DMCA only
     applies to copyright protection systems, which are essentially DRM technolo-
     gies. The DMCA does not apply to any other type of copyrighted software, so
     many reversing applications are not affected by it at all. Still, what exactly is
     prohibited under the DMCA?
       ■■   Circumvention of copyright protection systems: This means that a
            person may not defeat a Digital Rights Management technology, even
            for personal use. There are several exceptions where this is permitted,
            which are discussed later in this section.

  ■■   The development of circumvention technologies: This means that a per-
       son may not develop or make available any product or technology that
       circumvents a DRM technology. In case you’re wondering: Yes, the aver-
       age keygen program qualifies. In fact, a person developing a keygen vio-
       lates this section, and a person using a keygen violates the previous one.
  ■■   In case you’re truly a law-abiding citizen, a keygen is a program that
       generates a serial number on the fly for programs that request a serial
       number during installation. Keygens are (illegally) available online for
       practically any program that requires a serial number. Copy protections
       and keygens are discussed in depth in Part III of this book.
   Luckily, the DMCA makes several exceptions in which circumvention is
allowed. Here is a brief examination of each of the exemptions provided in the
DMCA:
  ■■   Interoperability: reversing and circumventing DRM technologies may
       be allowed in circumstances where such work is needed in order to
       interoperate with the software product in question. For example, if a
       program was encrypted for the purpose of copy protecting it, a soft-
       ware developer may decrypt the program in question if that’s the only
       way to interoperate with it.
  ■■   Encryption research: There is a highly restricted clause in the DMCA
       that allows researchers of encryption technologies to circumvent copy-
       right protection technologies in encryption products. Circumvention is
       only allowed if the protection technologies interfere with the evaluation
       of the encryption technology.
  ■■   Security testing: A person may reverse and circumvent copyright pro-
       tection software for the purpose of evaluating or improving the security
       of a computer system.
  ■■   Educational institutions and public libraries: These institutions may
       circumvent a copyright protection technology in order to evaluate the
       copyrighted work prior to purchasing it.
  ■■   Government investigation: Not surprisingly, government agencies
       conducting investigations are not affected by the DMCA.
  ■■   Regulation: DRM Technologies may be circumvented for the purpose
       of regulating the materials accessible to minors on the Internet. So, a
       theoretical product that allows unmonitored and uncontrolled Internet
       browsing may be reversed for the purpose of controlling a minor’s use
       of the Internet.
  ■■   Protection of privacy: Products that collect or transmit personal infor-
       mation may be reversed and any protection technologies they include
       may be circumvented.

     DMCA Cases
     The DMCA is relatively new as far as laws go, and therefore it hasn’t really
     been used extensively so far. There have been several high-profile cases in
     which the DMCA was invoked. Let’s take a brief look at two of those cases.
       Felten vs. RIAA: In September, 2000, the SDMI (Secure Digital Music Initia-
         tive) announced the Hack SDMI challenge. The Hack SDMI challenge
         was a call for security researchers to test the level of security offered by
         SDMI, a digital rights management system designed to protect audio
         recordings (based on watermarks). Princeton university professor
         Edward Felten and his research team found weaknesses in the system
         and wrote a paper describing their findings [Craver]. The original Hack
         SDMI challenge offered a $10,000 reward in return for giving up owner-
         ship of the information gathered. Felten’s team chose to forego this
         reward and retain ownership of the information in order to allow them
         to publish their findings. At this point, they received legal threats from
         SDMI and the RIAA (the Recording Industry Association of America)
         claiming liability under the DMCA. The team decided to withdraw their
         paper from the original conference to which it was submitted, but were
         eventually able to publish it at the USENIX Security Symposium. The
         sad thing about this whole story is that it is a classic case where the
         DMCA could actually reduce the level of security provided by the
         devices it was created to protect. Instead of allowing security researchers
         to publish their findings and force the developers of the security device
         to improve their product, the DMCA can be used for stifling the very
         process of open security research that has been historically proven to
         create the most robust security systems.
       US vs. Sklyarov: In July, 2001, Dmitry Sklyarov, a Russian programmer,
        was arrested by the FBI for what was claimed to be a violation of the
        DMCA. Sklyarov had reverse engineered the Adobe eBook file format
        while working for ElcomSoft, a software company from Moscow. The
        information gathered using reverse engineering was used in the creation
        of a program called Advanced eBook Processor that could decrypt such
        eBook files (these are essentially encrypted .pdf files that are used for
        distributing copyrighted materials such as books) so that they become
        readable by any PDF reader. This decryption meant that any original
        restriction on viewing, printing, or copying eBook files was bypassed,
        and that the files became unprotected. Adobe filed a complaint stating
        that the creation and distribution of the Advanced eBook Processor is a
        violation of the DMCA, and both Sklyarov and ElcomSoft were sued by
        the government. Eventually both Sklyarov and ElcomSoft were acquit-
        ted because the jury became convinced that the developers were origi-
        nally unaware of the illegal nature of their actions.

License Agreement Considerations
In light of the fact that other than the DMCA there are no laws that directly
prohibit or restrict reversing, and that the DMCA only applies to DRM prod-
ucts or to software that contains DRM technologies, software vendors add
anti-reverse-engineering clauses to shrink-wrap software license agreements.
That’s that very lengthy document you are always told to “accept” when
installing practically any software product in the world. It should be noted
that in most cases just using a program provides the legal equivalent of sign-
ing its license agreement (assuming that the user is given an opportunity to
view it).
   The main legal question around reverse-engineering clauses in license
agreements is whether they are enforceable. In the U.S., there doesn’t seem to
be a single, authoritative answer to this question—it all depends on the spe-
cific circumstances in which reverse engineering is undertaken. In the Euro-
pean Union this issue has been clearly defined by the Directive on the Legal
Protection of Computer Programs [EC1]. This directive defines that decompi-
lation of software programs is permissible in cases of interoperability. The
directive overrides any shrink-wrap license agreements, at least in this matter.

Code Samples & Tools
This book contains many code samples and demonstrates many reversing
tools. In an effort to avoid any legal minefields, particularly those imposed by
the DMCA, this book deals primarily with sample programs that were specif-
ically created for this purpose. There are several areas where third-party code
is reversed, but this is never code that is in any way responsible for protecting
copyrighted materials. Likewise, I have intentionally avoided any tool whose
primary purpose is reversing or defeating any kind of security mechanisms.
All of the tools used in this book are either generic reverse-engineering tools or
simply software development tools (such as debuggers) that are doubled as
reversing tools.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced the basic ground rules for reversing. We dis-
cussed some of the most popular applications of reverse engineering and the
typical reversing process. We introduced the types of tools that are commonly
used by reversers and evaluated the legal aspects of the process. Armed with
this basic understanding of what it is all about, we head on to the next chap-
ters, which provide an overview of the technical basics we must be familiar
with before we can actually start reversing.
                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                   2

                               Low-Level Software

This chapter provides an introduction to low-level software, which is a critical
aspect of the field of reverse engineering. Low-level software is a general name
for the infrastructural aspects of the software world. Because the low-level
aspects of software are often the only ones visible to us as reverse engineers,
we must develop a firm understanding of these layers that together make up
the realm of low-level software.
   This chapter opens with a very brief overview of the conventional, high-level
perspective of software that every software developer has been exposed to. We
then proceed to an introduction of low-level software and demonstrate how
fundamental high-level software concepts map onto the low-level realm. This
is followed by an introduction to assembly language, which is a key element in
the reversing process and an important part of this book. Finally, we introduce
several auxiliary low-level software topics that can assist in low-level software
comprehension: compilers and software execution environments.
   If you are an experienced software developer, parts of this chapter might
seem trivial, particularly the high-level perspectives in the first part of this
chapter. If that is the case, it is recommended that you start reading from the
section titled “Low-Level Perspectives” later in this chapter, which provides a
low-level perspective on familiar software development concepts.

     High-Level Perspectives
     Let’s review some basic software development concepts as they are viewed
     from the perspective of conventional software engineers. Even though this
     view is quite different from the one we get while reversing, it still makes sense
     to revisit these topics just to make sure they are fresh in your mind before
     entering into the discussion of low-level software.
        The following sections provide a quick overview of fundamental software
     engineering concepts such as program structure (procedures, objects, and the
     like), data management concepts (such as typical data structures, the role of
     variables, and so on), and basic control flow constructs. Finally, we briefly com-
     pare the most popular high-level programming languages and evaluate their
     “reversibility.” If you are a professional software developer and feel that these
     topics are perfectly clear to you, feel free to skip ahead to the section titled
     “Low-Level Perspectives” later in this chapter. In any case, please note that
     this is an ultra-condensed overview of material that could fill quite a few books.
     This section was not written as an introduction to software development—
     such an introduction is beyond the scope of this book.

     Program Structure
     When I was a kid, my first programming attempts were usually long chunks
     of BASIC code that just ran sequentially and contained the occasional goto
     commands that would go back and forth between different sections of the pro-
     gram. That was before I had discovered the miracle of program structure. Pro-
     gram structure is the thing that makes software, an inherently large and
     complex thing, manageable by humans. We break the monster into small
     chunks where each chunk represents a “unit” in the program in order to con-
     veniently create a mental image of the program in our minds. The same
     process takes place during reverse engineering. Reversers must try and recon-
     struct this map of the various components that together make up a program.
     Unfortunately, that is not always easy.
        The problem is that machines don’t really need program structure as much
     as we do. We humans can’t deal with the concept of working on and under-
     standing one big complicated thing—objects or concepts need to be broken up
     into manageable chunks. These chunks are good for dividing the work among
     various people and also for creating a mental division of the work within one’s
     mind. This is really a generic concept about human thinking—when faced
     with large tasks we’re naturally inclined to try to break them down into a
     bunch of smaller tasks that together make up the whole.
        Machines on the other hand often have a conflicting need for eliminating
     some of these structural elements. For example, think of how the process of
     compiling and linking a program eliminates program structure: individual

source files and libraries are all linked into a single executable, many function
boundaries are eliminated through inlining and are simply pasted into the
code that calls them. The machine is eliminating redundant structural details
that are not needed for efficiently running the code. All of these transforma-
tions affect the reversing process and make it somewhat more challenging. I
will be dealing with the process of reconstructing the structure of a program in
the reversing projects throughout this book.
   How do software developers break down software into manageable
chunks? The general idea is to view the program as a set of separate black
boxes that are responsible for very specific and (hopefully) accurately defined
tasks. The idea is that someone designs and implements a black box, tests it
and confirms that it works, and then integrates it with other components in the
system. A program can therefore be seen as a large collection of black boxes
that interact with one another. Different programming languages and devel-
opment platforms approach these concepts differently, but the general idea is
almost always the same.
   Likewise, when an application is being designed it is usually broken down
into mental black boxes that are each responsible for a chunk of the applica-
tion. For instance, in a word processor you could view the text-editing compo-
nent as one box and the spell checker component as another box. This process
is called encapsulation because each component box encapsulates certain func-
tionality and simply makes it available to whoever needs it, without exposing
unnecessary details about the internal implementation of the component.
   Component boxes are frequently developed by different people or even by
different groups, but they still must be able to interact. Boxes vary in size: Some
boxes implement entire application features (like the earlier spell checker
example), while others represent far smaller and more primitive functionality
such as sorting functions and other low-level data management functions.
These smaller boxes are usually made to be generic, meaning that they can be
used anywhere in the program where the specific functionality they provide is
required.
   Developing a robust and reliable product rests primarily on two factors: that
each component box is well implemented and reliably performs its duties, and
that each box has a well defined interface for communicating with the outside
world.
   In most reversing scenarios, the first step is to determine the component
structure of the application and the exact responsibilities of each component.
From there, one usually picks a component of interest and delves into the
details of its implementation.
   The following sections describe the various technical tools available to soft-
ware developers for implementing this type of component-level encapsulation
in the code. We start with large components, such as static and dynamic mod-
ules, and proceed to smaller units such as procedures and objects.

     Modules
     The largest building block for a program is the module. Modules are simply
     binary files that contain isolated areas of a program’s executable (essentially
     the component boxes from our previous discussion). There are two basic types
     of modules that can be combined together to make a program: static libraries
     and dynamic libraries.
       ■■   Static libraries: Static libraries make up a group of source-code files
            that are built together and represent a certain component of a program.
            Logically, static libraries usually represent a feature or an area of func-
            tionality in the program. Frequently, a static library is not an integral
            part of the product that’s being developed but rather an external, third-
            party library that adds certain functionality to it. Static libraries are
            added to a program while it is being built, and they become an integral
            part of the program’s binaries. They are difficult to make out and iso-
            late when we look at the program from a low-level perspective while
            reversing.
       ■■   Dynamic libraries: Dynamic libraries (called Dynamic Link Libraries, or
            DLLs in Windows) are similar to static libraries, except that they are not
            embedded into the program, and they remain in a separate file, even
            when the program is shipped to the end user. A dynamic library allows
            for upgrading individual components in a program without updating
            the entire program. As long as the interface it exports remains constant,
            a library can (at least in theory) be replaced seamlessly—without
            upgrading any other components in the program. An upgraded library
            would usually contain improved code, or even entirely different func-
            tionality through the same interface. Dynamic libraries are very easy to
            detect while reversing, and the interfaces between them often simplify
            the reversing process because they provide helpful hints regarding the
            program’s architecture.

     Common Code Constructs
     There are two basic code-level constructs that are considered the most funda-
     mental building blocks for a program. These are procedures and objects.
       In terms of code structure, the procedure is the most fundamental unit in soft-
     ware. A procedure is a piece of code, usually with a well-defined purpose, that
     can be invoked by other areas in the program. Procedures can optionally
     receive input data from the caller and return data to the caller. Procedures
     are the most commonly used form of encapsulation in any programming
     language.

   The next logical leap that supersedes procedures is to divide a program into
objects. Designing a program using objects is an entirely different process than
the process of designing a regular procedure-based program. This process is
called object-oriented design (OOD), and is considered by many to be the most
popular and effective approach to software design currently available.
   OOD methodology defines an object as a program component that has both
data and code associated with it. The code can be a set of procedures that is
related to the object and can manipulate its data. The data is part of the object
and is usually private, meaning that it can only be accessed by object code, but
not from the outside world. This simplifies the design processes, because
developers are forced to treat objects as completely isolated entities that can
only be accessed through their well-defined interfaces. Those interfaces usu-
ally consist of a set of procedures that are associated with the object. Those pro-
cedures can be defined as publicly accessible procedures, and are invoked
primarily by clients of the object. Clients are other components in the program
that require the services of the object but are not interested in any of its imple-
mentation details. In most programs, clients are themselves objects that simply
require the other objects’ services.
   Beyond the mere division of a program into objects, most object-oriented
programming languages provide an additional feature called inheritance.
Inheritance allows designers to establish a generic object type and implement
many specific implementations of that type that offer somewhat different
functionality. The idea is that the interface stays the same, so the client using
the object doesn’t have to know anything about the specific object type it is
dealing with—it only has to know the base type from which that object is
derived.
   This concept is implemented by declaring a base object, which includes a dec-
laration of a generic interface to be used by every object that inherits from that
base object. Base objects are usually empty declarations that offer little or no
actual functionality. In order to add an actual implementation of the object type,
another object is declared, which inherits from the base object and contains the
actual implementations of the interface procedures, along with any support
code or data structures. The beauty of this system is that for a single base object
there can be multiple descendant objects that can implement entirely different
functionalities, but export the same interface. Clients can use these objects with-
out knowing the specific object type they are dealing with—they are only aware
of the base object’s type. This concept is called polymorphism.

Data Management
A program deals with data. Any operation always requires input data, room
for intermediate data, and a way to send back results. To view a program from
below and understand what is happening, you must understand how data is

     managed in the program. This requires two perspectives: the high-level per-
     spective as viewed by software developers and the low-level perspective that
     is viewed by reversers.
        High-level languages tend to isolate software developers from the details
     surrounding data management at the system level. Developers are usually only
     made aware of the simplified data flow described by the high-level language.
        Naturally, most reversers are interested in obtaining a view of the program
     that matches that simplified high-level view as closely as possible. That’s
     because the high-level perspective is usually far more human-friendly than the
     machine’s perspective. Unfortunately, most programming languages and soft-
     ware development platforms strip (or mangle) much of that human-readable
     information from binaries shipped to end users.
        In order to be able to recover some or all of that high-level data flow infor-
     mation from a program binary, you must understand how programs view and
     treat data from both the programmer’s high-level perspective and the low-
     level machine-generated code. The following sections take us through a brief
     overview of high-level data constructs such as variables and the most common
     types of data structures.

     Variables
     For a software developer, the key to managing and storing data is usually
     named variables. All high-level languages provide developers with the means
     to declare variables at various scopes and use them to store information.
        Programming languages provide several abstractions for these variables.
     The level at which variables are defined determines which parts of the pro-
     gram will be able to access it, and also where it will be physically stored. The
     names of named variables are usually relevant only during compilation. Many
     compilers completely strip the names of variables from a program’s binaries
     and identify them using their address in memory. Whether or not this is done
     depends on the target platform for which the program is being built.

     User-Defined Data Structures
     User-defined data structures are simple constructs that represent a group of
     data fields, each with its own type. The idea is that these fields are all somehow
     related, which is why the program stores and handles them as a single unit. The
     data types of the specific fields inside a data structure can either be simple data
     types such as integers or pointers or they can be other data structures.
        While reversing, you’ll be encountering a variety of user-defined data struc-
     tures. Properly identifying such data structures and deciphering their contents
     is critical for achieving program comprehension. The key to doing this suc-
     cessfully is to gradually record every tiny detail discovered about them until

you have a sufficient understanding of the individual fields. This process will
be demonstrated in the reversing chapters in the second part of this book.

Lists
Other than user-defined data structures, programs routinely use a variety of
generic data structures for organizing their data. Most of these generic data
structures represent lists of items (where each item can be of any type, from a
simple integer to a complex user-defined data structure). A list is simply a
group of data items that share the same data type and that the program views
as belonging to the same group. In most cases, individual list entries contain
unique information while sharing a common data layout. Examples include
lists such as a list of contacts in an organizer program or list of e-mail messages
in an e-mail program. Those are the user-visible lists, but most programs will
also maintain a variety of user-invisible lists that manage such things as areas
in memory currently active, files currently open for access, and the like.
   The way in which lists are laid out in memory is a significant design deci-
sion for software engineers and usually depends on the contents of the items
and what kinds of operations are performed on the list. The expected number
of items is also a deciding factor in choosing the list’s format. For example, lists
that are expected to have thousands or millions of items might be laid out dif-
ferently than lists that can only grow to a couple of dozens of items. Also, in
some lists the order of the items is critical, and new items are constantly added
and removed from specific locations in the middle of the list. Other lists aren’t
sensitive to the specific position of each item. Another criterion is the ability to
efficiently search for items and quickly access them. The following is a brief
discussion of the common lists found in the average program:
  ■■    Arrays: Arrays are the most basic and intuitive list layout—items are
        placed sequentially in memory one after the other. Items are referenced
        by the code using their index number, which is just the number of items
        from the beginning of the list to the item in question. There are also
        multidimensional arrays, which can be visualized as multilevel arrays.
        For example, a two-dimensional array can be visualized as a simple
        table with rows and columns, where each reference to the table requires
        the use of two position indicators: row and column. The most signifi-
        cant downside of arrays is the difficulty of adding and removing items
        in the middle of the list. Doing that requires that the second half of the
        array (any items that come after the item we’re adding or removing) be
        copied to make room for the new item or eliminate the empty slot pre-
        viously occupied by an item. With very large lists, this can be an
        extremely inefficient operation.

       ■■   Linked lists: In a linked list, each item is given its own memory space
            and can be placed anywhere in memory. Each item stores the memory
            address of the next item (a link), and sometimes also a link to the previ-
            ous item. This arrangement has the added flexibility of supporting the
            quick addition or removal of an item because no memory needs to be
            copied. To add or remove items in a linked list, the links in the items
            that surround the item being added or removed must be changed to
            reflect the new order of items. Linked lists address the weakness of
            arrays with regard to inefficiencies when adding and removing items
            by not placing items sequentially in memory. Of course, linked lists also
            have their weaknesses. Because items are randomly scattered through-
            out memory, there can be no quick access to individual items based on
            their index. Also, linked lists are less efficient than arrays with regard to
            memory utilization, because each list item must have one or two link
            pointers, which use up precious memory.
       ■■   Trees: A tree is similar to a linked list in that memory is allocated sepa-
            rately for each item in the list. The difference is in the logical arrange-
            ment of the items: In a tree structure, items are arranged hierarchically,
            which greatly simplifies the process of searching for an item. The root
            item represents a median point in the list, and contains links to the two
            halves of the tree (these are essentially branches): one branch links to
            lower-valued items, while the other branch links to higher-valued
            items. Like the root item, each item in the lower levels of the hierarchy
            also has two links to lower nodes (unless it is the lowest item in the
            hierarchy). This layout greatly simplifies the process of binary searching,
            where with each iteration one eliminates one-half of the list in which it
            is known that the item is not present. With a binary search, the number
            of iterations required is very low because with each iteration the list
            becomes about 50 percent shorter.

     Control Flow
     In order to truly understand a program while reversing, you’ll almost always
     have to decipher control flow statements and try to reconstruct the logic behind
     those statements. Control flow statements are statements that affect the flow of
     the program based on certain values and conditions. In high-level languages,
     control flow statements come in the form of basic conditional blocks and loops,
     which are translated into low-level control flow statements by the compiler.
     Here is a brief overview of the basic high-level control flow constructs:
       ■■   Conditional blocks: Conditional code blocks are implemented in most
            programming languages using the if statement. They allow for speci-
            fying one or more condition that controls whether a block of code is
            executed or not.

  ■■   Switch blocks: Switch blocks (also known as n-way conditionals) usually
       take an input value and define multiple code blocks that can get exe-
       cuted for different input values. One or more values are assigned to
       each code block, and the program jumps to the correct code block in
       runtime based on the incoming input value. The compiler implements
       this feature by generating code that takes the input value and searches
       for the correct code block to execute, usually by consulting a lookup
       table that has pointers to all the different code blocks.
  ■■   Loops: Loops allow programs to repeatedly execute the same code
       block any number of times. A loop typically manages a counter that
       determines the number of iterations already performed or the number
       of iterations that remain. All loops include some kind of conditional
       statement that determines when the loop is interrupted. Another way to
       look at a loop is as a conditional statement that is identical to a condi-
       tional block, with the difference that the conditional block is executed
       repeatedly. The process is interrupted when the condition is no longer
       satisfied.

High-Level Languages
High-level languages were made to allow programmers to create software
without having to worry about the specific hardware platform on which their
program would run and without having to worry about all kinds of annoying
low-level details that just aren’t relevant for most programmers. Assembly lan-
guage has its advantages, but it is virtually impossible to create large and com-
plex software on assembly language alone. High-level languages were made to
isolate programmers from the machine and its tiny details as much as possible.
   The problem with high-level languages is that there are different demands
from different people and different fields in the industry. The primary tradeoff
is between simplicity and flexibility. Simplicity means that you can write a rel-
atively short program that does exactly what you need it to, without having to
deal with a variety of unrelated machine-level details. Flexibility means that
there isn’t anything that you can’t do with the language. High-level languages
are usually aimed at finding the right balance that suits most of their users. On
one hand, there are certain things that happen at the machine-level that pro-
grammers just don’t need to know about. On the other, hiding certain aspects
of the system means that you lose the ability to do certain things.
   When you reverse a program, you usually have no choice but to get your
hands dirty and become aware of many details that happen at the machine
level. In most cases, you will be exposed to such obscure aspects of the inner
workings of a program that even the programmers that wrote them were
unaware of. The challenge is to sift through this information with enough
understanding of the high-level language used and to try to reach a close

     approximation of what was in the original source code. How this is done
     depends heavily on the specific programming language used for developing
     the program.
       From a reversing standpoint, the most important thing about a high-level
     programming language is how strongly it hides or abstracts the underlying
     machine. Some languages such as C provide a fairly low-level perspective on
     the machine and produce code that directly runs on the target processor. Other
     languages such as Java provide a substantial level of separation between the
     programmer and the underlying processor.
       The following sections briefly discuss today’s most popular programming
     languages:

     C
     The C programming language is a relatively low-level language as high-level
     languages go. C provides direct support for memory pointers and lets you
     manipulate them as you please. Arrays can be defined in C, but there is no
     bounds checking whatsoever, so you can access any address in memory that
     you please. On the other hand, C provides support for the common high-level
     features found in other, higher-level languages. This includes support for
     arrays and data structures, the ability to easily implement control flow code
     such as conditional code and loops, and others.
        C is a compiled language, meaning that to run the program you must run
     the source code through a compiler that generates platform-specific program
     binaries. These binaries contain machine code in the target processor’s own
     native language. C also provides limited cross-platform support. To run a pro-
     gram on more than one platform you must recompile it with a compiler that
     supports the specific target platform.
        Many factors have contributed to C’s success, but perhaps most important is
     the fact that the language was specifically developed for the purpose of writ-
     ing the Unix operating system. Modern versions of Unix such as the Linux
     operating system are still written in C. Also, significant portions of the
     Microsoft Windows operating system were also written in C (with the rest of
     the components written in C++).
        Another feature of C that greatly affected its commercial success has been its
     high performance. Because C brings you so close to the machine, the code
     written by programmers is almost directly translated into machine code by
     compilers, with very little added overhead. This means that programs written
     in C tend to have very high runtime performance.
        C code is relatively easy to reverse because it is fairly similar to the machine
     code. When reversing one tries to read the machine code and reconstruct the

original source code as closely as possible (though sometimes simply under-
standing the machine code might be enough). Because the C compiler alters so
little about the program, relatively speaking, it is fairly easy to reconstruct a
good approximation of the C source code from a program’s binaries. Except
where noted, the high-level language code samples in this book were all writ-
ten in C.

C++
The C++ programming language is an extension of C, and shares C’s basic syn-
tax. C++ takes C to the next level in terms of flexibility and sophistication by
introducing support for object-oriented programming. The important thing is
that C++ doesn’t impose any new limits on programmers. With a few minor
exceptions, any program that can be compiled under a C compiler will com-
pile under a C++ compiler.
   The core feature introduced in C++ is the class. A class is essentially a data
structure that can have code members, just like the object constructs described
earlier in the section on code constructs. These code members usually manage
the data stored within the class. This allows for a greater degree of encapsula-
tion, whereby data structures are unified with the code that manages them. C++
also supports inheritance, which is the ability to define a hierarchy of classes that
enhance each other’s functionality. Inheritance allows for the creation of base
classes that unify a group of functionally related classes. It is then possible to
define multiple derived classes that extend the base class’s functionality.
   The real beauty of C++ (and other object-oriented languages) is polymor-
phism (briefly discussed earlier, in the “Common Code Constructs” section).
Polymorphism allows for derived classes to override members declared in the
base class. This means that the program can use an object without knowing its
exact data type—it must only be familiar with the base class. This way, when a
member function is invoked, the specific derived object’s implementation is
called, even though the caller is only aware of the base class.
   Reversing code written in C++ is very similar to working with C code,
except that emphasis must be placed on deciphering the program’s class hier-
archy and on properly identifying class method calls, constructor calls, etc.
Specific techniques for identifying C++ constructs in assembly language code
are presented in Appendix C.

  In case you’re not familiar with the syntax of C, C++ draws its name from the C
  syntax, where specifying a variable name followed by ++ incdicates that the
  variable is to be incremented by 1. C++ is the equivalent of C = C + 1.

     Java
     Java is an object-oriented, high-level language that is different from other lan-
     guages such as C and C++ because it is not compiled into any native proces-
     sor’s assembly language, but into the Java bytecode. Briefly, the Java instruction
     set and bytecode are like a Java assembly language of sorts, with the difference
     that this language is not usually interpreted directly by the hardware, but is
     instead interpreted by software (the Java Virtual Machine).
        Java’s primary strength is the ability to allow a program’s binary to run on
     any platform for which the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) is available.
        Because Java programs run on a virtual machine (VM), the process of
     reversing a Java program is completely different from reversing programs
     written in compiler-based languages such as C and C++. Java executables
     don’t use the operating system’s standard executable format (because they are
     not executed directly on the system’s CPU). Instead they use .class files, which
     are loaded directly by the virtual machine.
        The Java bytecode is far more detailed compared to a native processor
     machine code such as IA-32, which makes decompilation a far more viable
     option. Java classes can often be decompiled with a very high level of accuracy,
     so that the process of reversing Java classes is usually much simpler than with
     native code because it boils down to reading a source-code-level representa-
     tion of the program. Sure, it is still challenging to comprehend a program’s
     undocumented source code, but it is far easier compared to starting with a
     low-level assembly language representation.

     C#
     C# was developed by Microsoft as a Java-like object-oriented language that
     aims to overcome many of the problems inherent in C++. C# was introduced
     as part of Microsoft’s .NET development platform, and (like Java and quite a
     few other languages) is based on the concept of using a virtual machine for
     executing programs.
        C# programs are compiled into an intermediate bytecode format (similar to
     the Java bytecode) called the Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL). MSIL
     programs run on top of the common language runtime (CLR), which is essen-
     tially the .NET virtual machine. The CLR can be ported into any platform,
     which means that .NET programs are not bound to Windows—they could be
     executed on other platforms.
        C# has quite a few advanced features such as garbage collection and type
     safety that are implemented by the CLR. C# also has a special unmanaged mode
     that enables direct pointer manipulation.
        As with Java, reversing C# programs sometimes requires that you learn the
     native language of the CLR—MSIL. On the other hand, in many cases manu-
     ally reading MSIL code will be unnecessary because MSIL code contains

highly detailed information regarding the program and the data types it deals
with, which makes it possible to produce a reasonably accurate high-level lan-
guage representation of the program through decompilation. Because of this
level of transparency, developers often obfuscate their code to make it more
difficult to comprehend. The process of reversing .NET programs and the
effects of the various obfuscation tools are discussed in Chapter 12.

Low-Level Perspectives
The complexity in reversing arises when we try to create an intuitive link
between the high-level concepts described earlier and the low-level perspec-
tive we get when we look at a program’s binary. It is critical that you develop
a sort of “mental image” of how high-level constructs such as procedures,
modules, and variables are implemented behind the curtains. The following
sections describe how basic program constructs such as data structures and
control flow constructs are represented in the lower-levels.

Low-Level Data Management
One of the most important differences between high-level programming lan-
guages and any kind of low-level representation of a program is in data man-
agement. The fact is that high-level programming languages hide quite a few
details regarding data management. Different languages hide different levels
of details, but even plain ANSI C (which is considered to be a relatively low-
level language among the high-level language crowd) hides significant data
management details from developers.
   For instance, consider the following simple C language code snippet.

  int Multiply(int x, int y)
  {
  int z;
  z = x * y;
  return z;
  }

   This function, as simple as it may seem, could never be directly translated
into a low-level representation. Regardless of the platform, CPUs rarely have
instructions for declaring a variable or for multiplying two variables to yield a
third. Hardware limitations and performance considerations dictate and limit
the level of complexity that a single instruction can deal with. Even though
Intel IA-32 CPUs support a very wide range of instructions, some of which
remarkably powerful, most of these instructions are still very primitive com-
pared to high-level language statements.

        So, a low-level representation of our little Multiply function would usu-
     ally have to take care of the following tasks:
       1. Store machine state prior to executing function code
       2. Allocate memory for z
       3. Load parameters x and y from memory into internal processor memory
          (registers)
       4. Multiply x by y and store the result in a register
       5. Optionally copy the multiplication result back into the memory area
          previously allocated for z
       6. Restore machine state stored earlier
       7. Return to caller and send back z as the return value
       You can easily see that much of the added complexity is the result of low-
     level data management considerations. The following sections introduce the
     most common low-level data management constructs such as registers, stacks,
     and heaps, and how they relate to higher-level concepts such as variables and
     parameters.

       HIGH-LEVEL VERSUS LOW-LEVEL DATA MANAGEMENT

          One question that pops to mind when we start learning about low-level
       software is why are things presented in such a radically different way down
       there? The fundamental problem here is execution speed in microprocessors.
          In modern computers, the CPU is attached to the system memory using a
       high-speed connection (a bus). Because of the high operation speed of the
       CPU, the RAM isn’t readily available to the CPU. This means that the CPU can’t
       just submit a read request to the RAM and expect an immediate reply, and
       likewise it can’t make a write request and expect it to be completed
       immediately. There are several reasons for this, but it is caused primarily by the
       combined latency that the involved components introduce. Simply put, when
       the CPU requests that a certain memory address be written to or read from, the
       time it takes for that command to arrive at the memory chip and be processed,
       and for a response to be sent back, is much longer than a single CPU clock
       cycle. This means that the processor might waste precious clock cycles simply
       waiting for the RAM.
          This is the reason why instructions that operate directly on memory-based
       operands are slower and are avoided whenever possible. The relatively lengthy
       period of time each memory access takes to complete means that having a
       single instruction read data from memory, operate on that data, and then write
       the result back into memory might be unreasonable compared to the
       processor’s own performance capabilities.

Registers
In order to avoid having to access the RAM for every single instruction,
microprocessors use internal memory that can be accessed with little or no
performance penalty. There are several different elements of internal memory
inside the average microprocessor, but the one of interest at the moment is the
register. Registers are small chunks of internal memory that reside within the
processor and can be accessed very easily, typically with no performance
penalty whatsoever.
   The downside with registers is that there are usually very few of them. For
instance, current implementations of IA-32 processors only have eight 32-bit
registers that are truly generic. There are quite a few others, but they’re mostly
there for specific purposes and can’t always be used. Assembly language code
revolves around registers because they are the easiest way for the processor to
manage and access immediate data. Of course, registers are rarely used for
long-term storage, which is where external RAM enters into the picture. The
bottom line of all of this is that CPUs don’t manage these issues automatically—
they are taken care of in assembly language code. Unfortunately, managing
registers and loading and storing data from RAM to registers and back cer-
tainly adds a bit of complexity to assembly language code.
   So, if we go back to our little code sample, most of the complexities revolve
around data management. x and y can’t be directly multiplied from memory,
the code must first read one of them into a register, and then multiply that reg-
ister by the other value that’s still in RAM. Another approach would be to copy
both values into registers and then multiply them from registers, but that
might be unnecessary.
   These are the types of complexities added by the use of registers, but regis-
ters are also used for more long-term storage of values. Because registers are so
easily accessible, compilers use registers for caching frequently used values
inside the scope of a function, and for storing local variables defined in the
program’s source code.
   While reversing, it is important to try and detect the nature of the values
loaded into each register. Detecting the case where a register is used simply to
allow instructions access to specific values is very easy because the register is
used only for transferring a value from memory to the instruction or the other
way around. In other cases, you will see the same register being repeatedly
used and updated throughout a single function. This is often a strong indica-
tion that the register is being used for storing a local variable that was defined
in the source code. I will get back to the process of identifying the nature of val-
ues stored inside registers in Part II, where I will be demonstrating several
real-world reversing sessions.

     The Stack
     Let’s go back to our earlier Multiply example and examine what happens in
     Step 2 when the program allocates storage space for variable “z”. The specific
     actions taken at this stage will depend on some seriously complex logic that
     takes place inside the compiler. The general idea is that the value is placed
     either in a register or on the stack. Placing the value in a register simply means
     that in Step 4 the CPU would be instructed to place the result in the allocated
     register. Register usage is not managed by the processor, and in order to start
     using one you simply load a value into it. In many cases, there are no available
     registers or there is a specific reason why a variable must reside in RAM and
     not in a register. In such cases, the variable is placed on the stack.
        A stack is an area in program memory that is used for short-term storage of
     information by the CPU and the program. It can be thought of as a secondary
     storage area for short-term information. Registers are used for storing the most
     immediate data, and the stack is used for storing slightly longer-term data.
     Physically, the stack is just an area in RAM that has been allocated for this pur-
     pose. Stacks reside in RAM just like any other data—the distinction is entirely
     logical. It should be noted that modern operating systems manage multiple
     stacks at any given moment—each stack represents a currently active program
     or thread. I will be discussing threads and how stacks are allocated and man-
     aged in Chapter 3.
        Internally, stacks are managed as simple LIFO (last in, first out) data struc-
     tures, where items are “pushed” and “popped” onto them. Memory for stacks
     is typically allocated from the top down, meaning that the highest addresses
     are allocated and used first and that the stack grows “backward,” toward the
     lower addresses. Figure 2.1. demonstrates what the stack looks like after push-
     ing several values onto it, and Figure 2.2. shows what it looks like after they’re
     popped back out.
        A good example of stack usage can be seen in Steps 1 and 6. The machine
     state that is being stored is usually the values of the registers that will be used
     in the function. In these cases, register values always go to the stack and are
     later loaded back from the stack into the corresponding registers.

                         Code Executed:

                         PUSH Value 1
                         PUSH Value 2
                         PUSH Value 3

                       After PUSH
                         32 Bits
                                                                    Lower Memory
                 Unknown Data (Unused)
                                                                    Addresses
                 Unknown Data (Unused)

                                             PUSH Direction
                        Value 3

                        Value 2

                        Value 1
    ESP
                                                                    Higher Memory
                 Previously Stored Value
                                                                    Addresses

Figure 2.1 A view of the stack after three values are pushed in.

                        Code Executed:

                           POP EAX
                           POP EBX
                           POP ECX

                       After POP
                         32 Bits
                                                                    Lower Memory
                 Unknown Data (Unused)
                                                                    Addresses
                 Unknown Data (Unused)
                                                    POP Direction

                 Unknown Data (Unused)

                 Unknown Data (Unused)

    ESP          Unknown Data (Unused)
                                                                    Higher Memory
                 Previously Stored Value
                                                                    Addresses

Figure 2.2 A view of the stack after the three values are popped out.

       If you try to translate stack usage to a high-level perspective, you will see
     that the stack can be used for a number of different things:
       ■■   Temporarily saved register values: The stack is frequently used for
            temporarily saving the value of a register and then restoring the saved
            value to that register. This can be used in a variety of situations—when
            a procedure has been called that needs to make use of certain registers.
            In such cases, the procedure might need to preserve the values of regis-
            ters to ensure that it doesn’t corrupt any registers used by its callers.
       ■■   Local variables: It is a common practice to use the stack for storing
            local variables that don’t fit into the processor’s registers, or for vari-
            ables that must be stored in RAM (there is a variety of reasons why that
            is needed, such as when we want to call a function and have it write a
            value into a local variable defined in the current function). It should be
            noted that when dealing with local variables data is not pushed and
            popped onto the stack, but instead the stack is accessed using offsets,
            like a data structure. Again, this will all be demonstrated once you enter
            the real reversing sessions, in the second part of this book.
       ■■   Function parameters and return addresses: The stack is used for imple-
            menting function calls. In a function call, the caller almost always
            passes parameters to the callee and is responsible for storing the current
            instruction pointer so that execution can proceed from its current posi-
            tion once the callee completes. The stack is used for storing both para-
            meters and the instruction pointer for each procedure call.

     Heaps
     A heap is a managed memory region that allows for the dynamic allocation of
     variable-sized blocks of memory in runtime. A program simply requests a
     block of a certain size and receives a pointer to the newly allocated block
     (assuming that enough memory is available). Heaps are managed either by
     software libraries that are shipped alongside programs or by the operating
     system.
        Heaps are typically used for variable-sized objects that are used by the pro-
     gram or for objects that are too big to be placed on the stack. For reversers,
     locating heaps in memory and properly identifying heap allocation and free-
     ing routines can be helpful, because it contributes to the overall understanding
     of the program’s data layout. For instance, if you see a call to what you know
     is a heap allocation routine, you can follow the flow of the procedure’s return
     value throughout the program and see what is done with the allocated block,
     and so on. Also, having accurate size information on heap-allocated objects
     (block size is always passed as a parameter to the heap allocation routine) is
     another small hint towards program comprehension.

Executable Data Sections
Another area in program memory that is frequently used for storing applica-
tion data is the executable data section. In high-level languages, this area typi-
cally contains either global variables or preinitialized data. Preinitialized data
is any kind of constant, hard-coded information included with the program.
Some preinitialized data is embedded right into the code (such as constant
integer values, and so on), but when there is too much data, the compiler
stores it inside a special area in the program executable and generates code
that references it by address. An excellent example of preinitialized data is any
kind of hard-coded string inside a program. The following is an example of
this kind of string.

  char szWelcome = “This string will be stored in the executable’s
  preinitialized data section”;

   This definition, written in C, will cause the compiler to store the string in the
executable’s preinitialized data section, regardless of where in the code szWelcome
is declared. Even if szWelcome is a local variable declared inside a function, the
string will still be stored in the preinitialized data section. To access this string,
the compiler will emit a hard-coded address that points to the string. This is
easily identified while reversing a program, because hard-coded memory
addresses are rarely used for anything other than pointing to the executable’s
data section.
   The other common case in which data is stored inside an executable’s data
section is when the program defines a global variable. Global variables provide
long-term storage (their value is retained throughout the life of the program)
that is accessible from anywhere in the program, hence the term global. In most
languages, a global variable is defined by simply declaring it outside of the
scope of any function. As with preinitialized data, the compiler must use hard-
coded memory addresses in order to access global variables, which is why
they are easily recognized when reversing a program.

Control Flow
Control flow is one of those areas where the source-code representation really
makes the code look user-friendly. Of course, most processors and low-level
languages just don’t know the meaning of the words if or while. Looking at
the low-level implementation of a simple control flow statement is often con-
fusing, because the control flow constructs used in the low-level realm are
quite primitive. The challenge is in converting these primitive constructs back
into user-friendly high-level concepts.

       One of the problems is that most high-level conditional statements are just
     too lengthy for low-level languages such as assembly language, so they are
     broken down into sequences of operations. The key to understanding these
     sequences, the correlation between them, and the high-level statements from
     which they originated, is to understand the low-level control flow constructs
     and how they can be used for representing high-level control flow statements.
     The details of these low-level constructs are platform- and language-specific;
     we will be discussing control flow statements in IA-32 assembly language in
     the following section on assembly language.

     Assembly Language 101
     In order to understand low-level software, one must understand assembly lan-
     guage. For most purposes, assembly language is the language of reversing, and
     mastering it is an essential step in becoming a real reverser, because with most
     programs assembly language is the only available link to the original source
     code. Unfortunately, there is quite a distance between the source code of most
     programs and the compiler-generated assembly language code we must work
     with while reverse engineering. But fear not, this book contains a variety of
     techniques for squeezing every possible bit of information from assembly lan-
     guage programs!
        The following sections provide a quick introduction to the world of assem-
     bly language, while focusing on the IA-32 (Intel’s 32-bit architecture), which is
     the basis for all of Intel’s x86 CPUs from the historical 80386 to the modern-day
     implementations. I’ve chosen to focus on the Intel IA-32 assembly language
     because it is used in every PC in the world and is by far the most popular
     processor architecture out there. Intel-compatible CPUs, such as those made
     by Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), Transmeta, and so on are mostly identical
     for reversing purposes because they are object-code-compatible with Intel’s
     processors.

     Registers
     Before starting to look at even the most basic assembly language code, you
     must become familiar with IA-32 registers, because you’ll be seeing them ref-
     erenced in almost every assembly language instruction you’ll ever encounter.
     For most purposes, the IA-32 has eight generic registers: EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX,

ESI, EDI, EBP, and ESP. Beyond those, the architecture also supports a stack
of floating-point registers, and a variety of other registers that serve specific
system-level requirements, but those are rarely used by applications and
won’t be discussed here. Conventional program code only uses the eight
generic registers.
   Table 2.1 provides brief descriptions of these registers and their most com-
mon uses.
   Notice that all of these names start with the letter E, which stands for
extended. These register names have been carried over from the older 16-bit
Intel architecture, where they had the exact same names, minus the Es (so that
EAX was called AX, etc.). This is important because sometimes you’ll run into
32-bit code that references registers in that way: MOV AX, 0x1000, and so on.
Figure 2.3. shows all general purpose registers and their various names.

Table 2.1   Generic IA-32 Registers and Their Descriptions

  EAX, EBX, EDX               These are all generic registers that can be used for any
                              integer, Boolean, logical, or memory operation.

  ECX                         Generic, sometimes used as a counter by repetitive
                              instructions that require counting.

  ESI/EDI                     Generic, frequently used as source/destination pointers
                              in instructions that copy memory (SI stands for Source
                              Index, and DI stands for Destination Index).

  EBP                         Can be used as a generic register, but is mostly used as
                              the stack base pointer. Using a base pointer in
                              combination with the stack pointer creates a stack
                              frame. A stack frame can be defined as the current
                              function’s stack zone, which resides between the stack
                              pointer (ESP) and the base pointer (EBP). The base
                              pointer usually points to the stack position right after the
                              return address for the current function. Stack frames are
                              used for gaining quick and convenient access to both
                              local variables and to the parameters passed to the
                              current function.

  ESP                         This is the CPUs stack pointer. The stack pointer stores
                              the current position in the stack, so that anything pushed
                              to the stack gets pushed below this address, and this
                              register is updated accordingly.

                              AH             AL                  BH             BL

                           8 Bits         8 Bits              8 Bits         8 Bits

                                    AX                                  BX

                                   16 Bits                            16 Bits

                     EAX                                EBX

                    32 Bits                            32 Bits

                              CH             CL                  DH             DL

                           8 Bits         8 Bits              8 Bits         8 Bits

                                    CX                                 DX

                                   16 Bits                            16 Bits

                     ECX                                EDX

                    32 Bits                            32 Bits

                                    SP                                  BP

                                   16 Bits                            16 Bits

                     ESP                                EBP

                    32 Bits                            32 Bits

                                     SI                                 DI

                                   16 Bits                            16 Bits

                     ESI                                EDI

                    32 Bits                            32 Bits

Figure 2.3 General-purpose registers in IA-32.

     Flags
     IA-32 processors have a special register called EFLAGS that contains all kinds
     of status and system flags. The system flags are used for managing the various
     processor modes and states, and are irrelevant for this discussion. The status
     flags, on the other hand, are used by the processor for recording its current log-
     ical state, and are updated by many logical and integer instructions in order to
     record the outcome of their actions. Additionally, there are instructions that
     operate based on the values of these status flags, so that it becomes possible to

create sequences of instructions that perform different operations based on dif-
ferent input values, and so on.
   In IA-32 code, flags are a basic tool for creating conditional code. There are
arithmetic instructions that test operands for certain conditions and set proces-
sor flags based on their values. Then there are instructions that read these flags
and perform different operations depending on the values loaded into the
flags. One popular group of instructions that act based on flag values is the
Jcc (Conditional Jump) instructions, which test for certain flag values
(depending on the specific instruction invoked) and jump to a specified code
address if the flags are set according to the specific conditional code specified.
   Let’s look at an example to see how it is possible to create a conditional state-
ment like the ones we’re used to seeing in high-level languages using flags.
Say you have a variable that was called bSuccess in the high-level language,
and that you have code that tests whether it is false. The code might look like
this:

  if (bSuccess == FALSE) return 0;

   What would this line look like in assembly language? It is not generally pos-
sible to test a variable’s value and act on that value in a single instruction—
most instructions are too primitive for that. Instead, we must test the value of
bSuccess (which will probably be loaded into a register first), set some flags
that record whether it is zero or not, and invoke a conditional branch instruc-
tion that will test the necessary flags and branch if they indicate that the
operand handled in the most recent instruction was zero (this is indicated by
the Zero Flag, ZF). Otherwise the processor will just proceed to execute the
instruction that follows the branch instruction. Alternatively, the compiler
might reverse the condition and branch if bSuccess is nonzero. There are
many factors that determine whether compilers reverse conditions or not. This
topic is discussed in depth in Appendix A.

Instruction Format
Before we start discussing individual assembly language instructions, I’d like
to introduce the basic layout of IA-32 instructions. Instructions usually consist
of an opcode (operation code), and one or two operands. The opcode is an
instruction name such as MOV, and the operands are the “parameters” that
the instruction receives (some instructions have no operands). Naturally, each
instruction requires different operands because they each perform a different
task. Operands represent data that is handled by the specific instruction (just
like parameters passed to a function), and in assembly language, data comes in
three basic forms:

       ■■   Register name: The name of a general-purpose register to be read from
            or written to. In IA-32, this would be something like EAX, EBX, and so on.
       ■■   Immediate: A constant value embedded right in the code. This often
            indicates that there was some kind of hard-coded constant in the origi-
            nal program.
       ■■   Memory address: When an operand resides in RAM, its memory
            address is enclosed in brackets to indicate that it is a memory address.
            The address can either be a hard-coded immediate that simply tells the
            processor the exact address to read from or write to or it can be a regis-
            ter whose value will be used as a memory address. It is also possible to
            combine a register with some arithmetic and a constant, so that the reg-
            ister represents the base address of some object, and the constant repre-
            sents an offset into that object or an index into an array.
       The general instruction format looks like this:

       Instruction Name (opcode)          Destination Operand, Source Operand

       Some instructions only take one operand, whose purpose depends on the
     specific instruction. Other instructions take no operands and operate on pre-
     defined data. Table 2.2 provides a few typical examples of operands and
     explains their meanings.

     Basic Instructions
     Now that you’re familiar with the IA-32 registers, we can move on to some
     basic instructions. These are popular instructions that appear everywhere in a
     program. Please note that this is nowhere near an exhaustive list of IA-32
     instructions. It is merely an overview of the most common ones. For detailed
     information on each instruction refer to the IA-32 Intel Architecture Software
     Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A and Volume 2B [Intel2, Intel3]. These are the
     (freely available) IA-32 instruction set reference manuals from Intel.

Table 2.2   Examples of Typical Instruction Operands and Their Meanings

       OPERAND                 DESCRIPTION

       EAX                     Simply references EAX, either for reading or writing

       0x30004040              An immediate number embedded in the code (like a
                               constant)

       [0x4000349e]            An immediate hard-coded memory address—this can be a
                               global variable access

  THE AT&T ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE NOTATION

  Even though the assembly language instruction format described here follows
  the notation used in the official IA-32 documentation provided by Intel, it is not
  the only notation used for presenting IA-32 assembly language code. The AT&T
  Unix notation is another notation for assembly language instructions that is
  quite different from the Intel notation. In the AT&T notation the source operand
  usually precedes the destination operand (the opposite of how it is done in the
  Intel notation). Also, register names are prefixed with an % (so that EAX is
  referenced as %eax). Memory addresses are denoted using parentheses, so that
  %(ebx) means “the address pointed to by EBX.” The AT&T notation is mostly
  used in Unix development tools such as the GNU tools, while the Intel notation
  is primarily used in Windows tools, which is why this book uses the Intel
  notation for assembly language listings.

Moving Data
The MOV instruction is probably the most popular IA-32 instruction. MOV takes
two operands: a destination operand and a source operand, and simply moves
data from the source to the destination. The destination operand can be either
a memory address (either through an immediate or using a register) or a reg-
ister. The source operand can be an immediate, register, or memory address,
but note that only one of the operands can contain a memory address, and
never both. This is a generic rule in IA-32 instructions: with a few exceptions,
most instructions can only take one memory operand. Here is the “prototype”
of the MOV instruction:

  MOV     DestinationOperand, SourceOperand

  Please see the “Examples” section later in this chapter to get a glimpse of
how MOV and other instructions are used in real code.

Arithmetic
For basic arithmetic operations, the IA-32 instruction set includes six basic
integer arithmetic instructions: ADD, SUB, MUL, DIV, IMUL, and IDIV. The fol-
lowing table provides the common format for each instruction along with a
brief description. Note that many of these instructions support other configu-
rations, with different sets of operands. Table 2.3 shows the most common con-
figuration for each instruction.

Table 2.3   Typical Configurations of Basic IA-32 Arithmetic Instructions

       INSTRUCTION                          DESCRIPTION

       ADD Operand1, Operand2               Adds two signed or unsigned integers. The
                                            result is typically stored in Operand1.

       SUB Operand1, Operand2               Subtracts the value at Operand2 from the
                                            value at Operand1. The result is typically stored
                                            in Operand1. This instruction works for both
                                            signed and unsigned operands.

       MUL Operand                          Multiplies the unsigned operand by EAX and
                                            stores the result in a 64-bit value in EDX:EAX.
                                            EDX:EAX means that the low (least significant)
                                            32 bits are stored in EAX and the high (most
                                            significant) 32 bits are stored in EDX. This is a
                                            common arrangement in IA-32 instructions.

       DIV Operand                          Divides the unsigned 64-bit value stored in
                                            EDX:EAX by the unsigned operand. Stores the
                                            quotient in EAX and the remainder in EDX.

       IMUL Operand                         Multiplies the signed operand by EAX and
                                            stores the result in a 64-bit value in EDX:EAX.

       IDIV Operand                         Divides the signed 64-bit value stored in
                                            EDX:EAX by the signed operand. Stores the
                                            quotient in EAX and the remainder in EDX.

     Comparing Operands
     Operands are compared using the CMP instruction, which takes two operands:

       CMP
       Operand1, Operand2

        CMP records the result of the comparison in the processor’s flags. In essence,
     CMP simply subtracts Operand2 from Operand1 and discards the result,
     while setting all of the relevant flags to correctly reflect the outcome of the sub-
     traction. For example, if the result of the subtraction is zero, the Zero Flag (ZF)
     is set, which indicates that the two operands are equal. The same flag can be
     used for determining if the operands are not equal, by testing whether ZF is
     not set. There are other flags that are set by CMP that can be used for determin-
     ing which operand is greater, depending on whether the operands are signed
     or unsigned. For more information on these specific flags refer to Appendix A.
