
Conditional Branches
Conditional branches are implemented using the Jcc group of instructions.
These are instructions that conditionally branch to a specified address, based
on certain conditions. Jcc is just a generic name, and there are quite a few dif-
ferent variants. Each variant tests a different set of flag values to decide
whether to perform the branch or not. The specific variants are discussed in
Appendix A.
   The basic format of a conditional branch instruction is as follows:

  Jcc     TargetCodeAddress

  If the specified condition is satisfied, Jcc will just update the instruction
pointer to point to TargetCodeAddress (without saving its current value). If
the condition is not satisfied, Jcc will simply do nothing, and execution will
proceed at the following instruction.

Function Calls
Function calls are implemented using two basic instructions in assembly lan-
guage. The CALL instruction calls a function, and the RET instruction returns
to the caller. The CALL instruction pushes the current instruction pointer onto
the stack (so that it is later possible to return to the caller) and jumps to the
specified address. The function’s address can be specified just like any other
operand, as an immediate, register, or memory address. The following is the
general layout of the CALL instruction.

  CALL    FunctionAddress

   When a function completes and needs to return to its caller, it usually
invokes the RET instruction. RET pops the instruction pointer pushed to the
stack by CALL and resumes execution from that address. Additionally, RET can
be instructed to increment ESP by the specified number of bytes after popping
the instruction pointer. This is needed for restoring ESP back to its original
position as it was before the current function was called and before any para-
meters were pushed onto the stack. In some calling conventions the caller is
responsible for adjusting ESP, which means that in such cases RET will be used
without any operands, and that the caller will have to manually increment
ESP by the number of bytes pushed as parameters. Detailed information on
calling conventions is available in Appendix C.

     Examples
     Let’s have a quick look at a few short snippets of assembly language, just to
     make sure that you understand the basic concepts. Here is the first example:

       cmp      ebx,0xf020
       jnz      10026509

        The first instruction is CMP, which compares the two operands specified. In
     this case CMP is comparing the current value of register EBX with a constant:
     0xf020 (the “0x” prefix indicates a hexadecimal number), or 61,472 in deci-
     mal. As you already know, CMP is going to set certain flags to reflect the out-
     come of the comparison. The instruction that follows is JNZ. JNZ is a version of
     the Jcc (conditional branch) group of instructions described earlier. The spe-
     cific version used here will branch if the zero flag (ZF) is not set, which is why
     the instruction is called JNZ (jump if not zero). Essentially what this means is
     that the instruction will jump to the specified code address if the operands com-
     pared earlier by CMP are not equal. That is why JNZ is also called JNE (jump if
     not equal). JNE and JNZ are two different mnemonics for the same instruc-
     tion—they actually share the same opcode in the machine language.
        Let’s proceed to another example that demonstrates the moving of data and
     some arithmetic.

       mov      edi,[ecx+0x5b0]
       mov      ebx,[ecx+0x5b4]
       imul     edi,ebx

        This sequence starts with an MOV instruction that reads an address from
     memory into register EDI. The brackets indicate that this is a memory access,
     and the specific address to be read is specified inside the brackets. In this case,
     MOV will take the value of ECX, add 0x5b0 (1456 in decimal), and use the result
     as a memory address. The instruction will read 4 bytes from that address and
     write them into EDI. You know that 4 bytes are going to be read because of the
     register specified as the destination operand. If the instruction were to refer-
     ence DI instead of EDI, you would know that only 2 bytes were going to be
     read. EDI is a full 32-bit register (see Figure 2.3 for an illustration of IA-32 reg-
     isters and their sizes).
        The following instruction reads another memory address, this time from
     ECX plus 0x5b4 into register EBX. You can easily deduce that ECX points to
     some kind of data structure. 0x5b0 and 0x5b4 are offsets to some members
     within that data structure. If this were a real program, you would probably
     want to try and figure out more information regarding this data structure that
     is pointed to by ECX. You might do that by tracing back in the code to see
     where ECX is loaded with its current value. That would tell you where this

structure’s address is obtained, and might shed some light on the nature of
this data structure. I will be demonstrating all kinds of techniques for investi-
gating data structures in the reversing examples throughout this book.
   The final instruction in this sequence is an IMUL (signed multiply) instruc-
tion. IMUL has several different forms, but when specified with two operands
as it is here, it means that the first operand is multiplied by the second, and
that the result is written into the first operand. This means that the value of
EDI will be multiplied by the value of EBX and that the result will be written
back into EDI.
   If you look at these three instructions as a whole, you can get a good idea of
their purpose. They basically take two different members of the same data
structure (whose address is taken from ECX), and multiply them. Also, because
IMUL is used, you know that these members are signed integers, apparently
32-bits long. Not too bad for three lines of assembly language code!
   For the final example, let’s have a look at what an average function call
sequence looks like in IA-32 assembly language.

  push     eax
  push     edi
  push     ebx
  push     esi
  push     dword ptr [esp+0x24]
  call     0x10026eeb

   This sequence pushes five values into the stack using the PUSH instruction.
The first four values being pushed are all taken from registers. The fifth and
final value is taken from a memory address at ESP plus 0x24. In most cases,
this would be a stack address (ESP is the stack pointer), which would indicate
that this address is either a parameter that was passed to the current function
or a local variable. To accurately determine what this address represents, you
would need to look at the entire function and examine how it uses the stack. I
will be demonstrating techniques for doing this in Chapter 5.

A Primer on Compilers and Compilation
It would be safe to say that 99 percent of all modern software is implemented
using high-level languages and goes through some sort of compiler prior to
being shipped to customers. Therefore, it is also safe to say that most, if not all,
reversing situations you’ll ever encounter will include the challenge of deci-
phering the back-end output of one compiler or another.
   Because of this, it can be helpful to develop a general understanding of com-
pilers and how they operate. You can consider this a sort of “know your
enemy” strategy, which will help you understand and cope with the difficul-
ties involved in deciphering compiler-generated code.

        Compiler-generated code can be difficult to read. Sometimes it is just so dif-
     ferent from the original code structure of the program that it becomes difficult to
     determine the software developer’s original intentions. A similar problem hap-
     pens with arithmetic sequences: they are often rearranged to make them more
     efficient, and one ends up with an odd looking sequence of arithmetic opera-
     tions that might be very difficult to comprehend. The bottom line is that devel-
     oping an understanding of the processes undertaken by compilers and the way
     they “perceive” the code will help in eventually deciphering their output.
        The following sections provide a bit of background information on compil-
     ers and how they operate, and describe the different stages that take place
     inside the average compiler. While it is true that the following sections could
     be considered optional, I would still recommend that you go over them at
     some point if you are not familiar with basic compilation concepts. I firmly
     believe that reversers must truly know their systems, and no one can truly
     claim to understand the system without understanding how software is cre-
     ated and built.
        It should be emphasized that compilers are extremely complex programs
     that combine a variety of fields in computer science research and can have mil-
     lions of lines of code. The following sections are by no means comprehen-
     sive—they merely scratch the surface. If you’d like to deepen your knowledge
     of compilers and compiler optimizations, you should check out [Cooper]
     Keith D. Copper and Linda Torczon. Engineering a Compiler. Morgan Kauf-
     mann Publishers, 2004, for a highly readable tutorial on compilation tech-
     niques, or [Muchnick] Steven S. Muchnick. Advanced Compiler Design and
     Implementation. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1997, for a more detailed dis-
     cussion of advanced compilation materials such as optimizations, and so on.

     Defining a Compiler
     At its most basic level, a compiler is a program that takes one representation of
     a program as its input and produces a different representation of the same pro-
     gram. In most cases, the input representation is a text file containing code that
     complies with the specifications of a certain high-level programming lan-
     guage. The output representation is usually a lower-level translation of the
     same program. Such lower-level representation is usually read by hardware or
     software, and rarely by people. The bottom line is usually that compilers trans-
     form programs from their high-level, human-readable form into a lower-level,
     machine-readable form.
        During the translation process, compilers usually go through numerous
     improvement or optimization steps that take advantage of the compiler’s
     “understanding” of the program and employ various algorithms to improve
     the code’s efficiency. As I have already mentioned, these optimizations tend to
     have a strong “side effect”: they seriously degrade the emitted code’s read-
     ability. Compiler-generated code is simply not meant for human consumption.

Compiler Architecture
The average compiler consists of three basic components. The front end is
responsible for deciphering the original program text and for ensuring that its
syntax is correct and in accordance with the language’s specifications. The
optimizer improves the program in one way or another, while preserving its
original meaning. Finally, the back end is responsible for generating the plat-
form-specific binary from the optimized code emitted by the optimizer. The
following sections discuss each of these components in depth.

Front End
The compilation process begins at the compiler’s front end and includes several
steps that analyze the high-level language source code. Compilation usually
starts with a process called lexical analysis or scanning, in which the compiler
goes over the source file and scans the text for individual tokens within it.
Tokens are the textual symbols that make up the code, so that in a line such as:

  if (Remainder != 0)

    The symbols if, (, Remainder, and != are all tokens. While scanning for
tokens, the lexical analyzer confirms that the tokens produce legal “sentences”
in accordance with the rules of the language. For example, the lexical analyzer
might check that the token if is followed by a (, which is a requirement in
some languages. Along with each word, the analyzer stores the word’s mean-
ing within the specific context. This can be thought of as a very simple version
of how humans break sentences down in natural languages. A sentence is
divided into several logical parts, and words can only take on actual meaning
when placed into context. Similarly, lexical analysis involves confirming the
legality of each token within the current context, and marking that context. If
a token is found that isn’t expected within the current context, the compiler
reports an error.
    A compiler’s front end is probably the one component that is least relevant
to reversers, because it is primarily a conversion step that rarely modifies the
program’s meaning in any way—it merely verifies that it is valid and converts
it to the compiler’s intermediate representation.

Intermediate Representations
When you think about it, compilers are all about representations. A compiler’s
main role is to transform code from one representation to another. In the
process, a compiler must generate its own representation for the code. This
intermediate representation (or internal representation, as it’s sometimes called), is
useful for detecting any code errors, improving upon the code, and ultimately
for generating the resulting machine code.

        Properly choosing the intermediate representation of code in a compiler is
     one of the compiler designer’s most important design decisions. The layout
     heavily depends on what kind of source (high-level language) the compiler
     takes as input, and what kind of object code the compiler spews out. Some
     intermediate representations can be very close to a high-level language and
     retain much of the program’s original structure. Such information can be use-
     ful if advanced improvements and optimizations are to be performed on the
     code. Other compilers use intermediate representations that are closer to a
     low-level assembly language code. Such representations frequently strip
     much of the high-level structures embedded in the original code, and are suit-
     able for compiler designs that are more focused on the low-level details of the
     code. Finally, it is not uncommon for compilers to have two or more interme-
     diate representations, one for each stage in the compilation process.

     Optimizer
     Being able to perform optimizations is one of the primary reasons that
     reversers should understand compilers (the other reason being to understand
     code-level optimizations performed in the back end). Compiler optimizers
     employ a wide variety of techniques for improving the efficiency of the code.
     The two primary goals for optimizers are usually either generating the most
     high-performance code possible or generating the smallest possible program
     binaries. Most compilers can attempt to combine the two goals as much as pos-
     sible.
        Optimizations that take place in the optimizer are not processor-specific and
     are generic improvements made to the original program’s code without any
     relation to the specific platform to which the program is targeted. Regardless of
     the specific optimizations that take place, optimizers must always preserve the
     exact meaning of the original program and not change its behavior in any way.
        The following sections briefly discuss different areas where optimizers can
     improve a program. It is important to keep in mind that some of the opti-
     mizations that strongly affect a program’s readability might come from the
     processor-specific work that takes place in the back end, and not only from the
     optimizer.

     Code Structure
     Optimizers frequently modify the structure of the code in order to make it
     more efficient while preserving its meaning. For example, loops can often be
     partially or fully unrolled. Unrolling a loop means that instead of repeating the
     same chunk of code using a jump instruction, the code is simply duplicated so
     that the processor executes it more than once. This makes the resulting binary
     larger, but has the advantage of completely avoiding having to manage a
     counter and invoke conditional branches (which are fairly inefficient—see the

section on CPU pipelines later in this chapter). It is also possible to partially
unroll a loop so that the number of iterations is reduced by performing more
than one iteration in each cycle of the loop.
  When going over switch blocks, compilers can determine what would be
the most efficient approach for searching for the correct case in runtime. This
can be either a direct table where the individual blocks are accessed using the
operand, or using different kinds of tree-based search approaches.
  Another good example of a code structuring optimization is the way that
loops are rearranged to make them more efficient. The most common high-
level loop construct is the pretested loop, where the loop’s condition is tested
before the loop’s body is executed. The problem with this construct is that it
requires an extra unconditional jump at the end of the loop’s body in order to
jump back to the beginning of the loop (for comparison, posttested loops only
have a single conditional branch instruction at the end of the loop, which
makes them more efficient). Because of this, it is common for optimizers to
convert pretested loops to posttested loops. In some cases, this requires the
insertion of an if statement before the beginning of the loop, so as to make
sure the loop is not entered when its condition isn’t satisfied.
  Code structure optimizations are discussed in more detail in Appendix A.

Redundancy Elimination
Redundancy elimination is a significant element in the field of code optimization
that is of little interest to reversers. Programmers frequently produce code that
includes redundancies such as repeating the same calculation more than once,
assigning values to variables without ever using them, and so on. Optimizers
have algorithms that search for such redundancies and eliminate them.
  For example, programmers routinely leave static expressions inside loops,
which is wasteful because there is no need to repeatedly compute them—they
are unaffected by the loop’s progress. A good optimizer identifies such state-
ments and relocates them to an area outside of the loop in order to improve on
the code’s efficiency.
  Optimizers can also streamline pointer arithmetic by efficiently calculating
the address of an item within an array or data structure and making sure that
the result is cached so that the calculation isn’t repeated if that item needs to be
accessed again later on in the code.

Back End
A compiler’s back end, also sometimes called the code generator, is responsi-
ble for generating target-specific code from the intermediate code generated
and processed in the earlier phases of the compilation process. This is where
the intermediate representation “meets” the target-specific language, which is
usually some kind of a low-level assembly language.

       Because the code generator is responsible for the actual selection of specific
     assembly language instructions, it is usually the only component that has
     enough information to apply any significant platform-specific optimizations.
     This is important because many of the transformations that make compiler-
     generated assembly language code difficult to read take place at this stage.
       The following are the three of the most important stages (at least from our
     perspective) that take place during the code generation process:
       ■■   Instruction selection: This is where the code from the intermediate rep-
            resentation is translated into platform-specific instructions. The selec-
            tion of each individual instruction is very important to overall program
            performance and requires that the compiler be aware of the various
            properties of each instruction.
       ■■   Register allocation: In many intermediate representations there is an
            unlimited number of registers available, so that every local variable can
            be placed in a register. The fact that the target processor has a limited
            number of registers comes into play during code generation, when the
            compiler must decide which variable gets placed in which register, and
            which variable must be placed on the stack.
       ■■   Instruction scheduling: Because most modern processors can handle
            multiple instructions at once, data dependencies between individual
            instructions become an issue. This means that if an instruction performs
            an operation and stores the result in a register, immediately reading
            from that register in the following instruction would cause a delay,
            because the result of the first operation might not be available yet. For
            this reason the code generator employs platform-specific instruction
            scheduling algorithms that reorder instructions to try to achieve the
            highest possible level of parallelism. The end result is interleaved code,
            where two instruction sequences dealing with two separate things are
            interleaved to create one sequence of instructions. We will be seeing
            such sequences in many of the reversing sessions in this book.

     Listing Files
     A listing file is a compiler-generated text file that contains the assembly lan-
     guage code produced by the compiler. It is true that this information can be
     obtained by disassembling the binaries produced by the compiler, but a listing
     file also conveniently shows how each assembly language line maps to the
     original source code. Listing files are not strictly a reversing tool but more of a
     research tool used when trying to study the behavior of a specific compiler by
     feeding it different code and observing the output through the listing file.

   Most compilers support the generation of listing files during the compila-
tion process. For some compilers, such as GCC, this is a standard part of the
compilation process because the compiler doesn’t directly generate an object
file, but instead generates an assembly language file which is then processed
by an assembler. In such compilers, requesting a listing file simply means that
the compiler must not delete it after the assembler is done with it. In other
compilers (such as the Microsoft or Intel compilers), a listing file is an optional
feature that must be enabled through the command line.

Specific Compilers
Any compiled code sample discussed in this book has been generated with
one of three compilers (this does not include third-party code reversed in the
book):
  ■■   GCC and G++ version 3.3.1: The GNU C Compiler (GCC) and GNU
       C++ Compiler (G++) are popular open-source compilers that generate
       code for a large number of different processors, including IA-32. The
       GNU compilers (also available for other high-level languages) are com-
       monly used by developers working on Unix-based platforms such as
       Linux, and most Unix platforms are actually built using them. Note that
       it is also possible to write code for Microsoft Windows using the GNU
       compilers. The GNU compilers have a powerful optimization engine
       that usually produces results similar to those of the other two compilers
       in this list. However, the GNU compilers don’t seem to have a particu-
       larly aggressive IA-32 code generator, probably because of their ability
       to generate code for so many different processors. On one hand, this
       frequently makes the IA-32 code generated by them slightly less effi-
       cient compared to some of the other popular IA-32 compilers. On the
       other hand, from a reversing standpoint this is actually an advantage
       because the code they produce is often slightly more readable, at least
       compared to code produced by the other compilers discussed here.
  ■■   Microsoft C/C++ Optimizing Compiler version 13.10.3077: The
       Microsoft Optimizing Compiler is one of the most common compilers for
       the Windows platform. This compiler is shipped with the various ver-
       sions of Microsoft Visual Studio, and the specific version used through-
       out this book is the one shipped with Microsoft Visual C++ .NET 2003.
  ■■   Intel C++ Compiler version 8.0: The Intel C/C++ compiler was devel-
       oped primarily for those that need to squeeze the absolute maximum
       performance possible from Intel’s IA-32 processors. The Intel compiler
       has a good optimization stage that appears to be on par with the other
       two compilers on this list, but its back end is where the Intel compiler

            shines. Intel has, unsurprisingly, focused on making this compiler gen-
            erate highly optimized IA-32 code that takes the specifics of the Intel
            NetBurst architecture (and other Intel architectures) into account. The
            Intel compiler also supports the advanced SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 exten-
            sions offered in modern IA-32 processors.

     Execution Environments
     An execution environment is the component that actually runs programs. This
     can be a CPU or a software environment such as a virtual machine. Execution
     environments are especially important to reversers because their architectures
     often affect how the program is generated and compiled, which directly affects
     the readability of the code and hence the reversing process.
        The following sections describe the two basic types of execution environ-
     ments, which are virtual machines and microprocessors, and describe how a
     program’s execution environment affects the reversing process.

     Software Execution Environments (Virtual Machines)
     Some software development platforms don’t produce executable machine
     code that directly runs on a processor. Instead, they generate some kind of
     intermediate representation of the program, or bytecode. This bytecode is then
     read by a special program on the user’s machine, which executes the program
     on the local processor. This program is called a virtual machine. Virtual
     machines are always processor-specific, meaning that a specific virtual
     machine only runs on a specific platform. However, many bytecode formats
     have multiple virtual machines that allow running the same bytecode pro-
     gram on different platforms.
        Two common virtual machine architectures are the Java Virtual Machine
     (JVM) that runs Java programs, and the Common Language Runtime (CLR)
     that runs Microsoft .NET applications.
        Programs that run on virtual machines have several significant benefits
     compared to native programs executed directly on the underlying hardware:
       ■■   Platform isolation: Because the program reaches the end user in a
            generic representation that is not machine-specific, it can theoretically
            be executed on any computer platform for which a compatible execu-
            tion environment exists. The software vendor doesn’t have to worry
            about platform compatibility issues (at least theoretically)—the execu-
            tion environment stands between the program and the system and
            encapsulates any platform-specific aspects.

  ■■   Enhanced functionality: When a program is running under a virtual
       machine, it can (and usually does) benefit from a wide range of
       enhanced features that are rarely found on real silicon processors. This
       can include features such as garbage collection, which is an automated
       system that tracks resource usage and automatically releases memory
       objects once they are no longer in use. Another prominent feature is
       runtime type safety: because virtual machines have accurate data type
       information on the program being executed, they can verify that type
       safety is maintained throughout the program. Some virtual machines
       can also track memory accesses and make sure that they are legal.
       Because the virtual machine knows the exact length of each memory
       block and is able to track its usage throughout the application, it can
       easily detect cases where the program attempts to read or write beyond
       the end of a memory block, and so on.

Bytecodes
The interesting thing about virtual machines is that they almost always have
their own bytecode format. This is essentially a low-level language that is just
like a hardware processor’s assembly language (such as the IA-32 assembly
language). The difference of course is in how such binary code is executed.
Unlike conventional binary programs, in which each instruction is decoded
and executed by the hardware, virtual machines perform their own decoding
of the program binaries. This is what enables such tight control over every-
thing that the program does; because each instruction that is executed must
pass through the virtual machine, the VM can monitor and control any opera-
tions performed by the program.

  The distinction between bytecode and regular processor binary code has
  slightly blurred during the past few years. Several companies have been
  developing bytecode processors that can natively run bytecode languages,
  which were previously only supported on virtual machines. In Java, for
  example, there are companies such as Imsys and aJile that offer “direct
  execution processors” that directly execute the Java bytecode without the use
  of a virtual machine.

Interpreters
The original approach for implementing virtual machines has been to use
interpreters. Interpreters are programs that read a program’s bytecode exe-

     cutable and decipher each instruction and “execute” it in a virtual environ-
     ment implemented in software. It is important to understand that not only are
     these instructions not directly executed on the host processor, but also that the
     data accessed by the bytecode program is managed by the interpreter. This
     means that the bytecode program would not have direct access to the host
     CPU’s registers. Any “registers” accessed by the bytecode would usually have
     to be mapped to memory by the interpreter.
        Interpreters have one major drawback: performance. Because each instruc-
     tion is separately decoded and executed by a program running under the real
     CPU, the program ends up running significantly slower than it would were it
     running directly on the host’s CPU. The reasons for this become obvious when
     one considers the amount of work the interpreter must carry out in order to
     execute a single high-level bytecode instruction.
        For each instruction, the interpreter must jump to a special function or code
     area that deals with it, determine the involved operands, and modify the sys-
     tem state to reflect the changes. Even the best implementation of an interpreter
     still results in each bytecode instruction being translated into dozens of
     instructions on the physical CPU. This means that interpreted programs run
     orders of magnitude slower than their compiled counterparts.

     Just-in-Time Compilers
     Modern virtual machine implementations typically avoid using interpreters
     because of the performance issues described above. Instead they employ just-
     in-time compilers, or JiTs. Just-in-time compilation is an alternative approach for
     running bytecode programs without the performance penalty associated with
     interpreters.
        The idea is to take snippets of program bytecode at runtime and compile
     them into the native processor’s machine language before running them.
     These snippets are then executed natively on the host’s CPU. This is usually an
     ongoing process where chunks of bytecode are compiled on demand, when-
     ever they are required (hence the term just-in-time).

     Reversing Strategies
     Reversing bytecode programs is often an entirely different experience com-
     pared to that of conventional, native executable programs. First and foremost,
     most bytecode languages are far more detailed compared to their native
     machine code counterparts. For example, Microsoft .NET executables contain
     highly detailed data type information called metadata. Metadata provides
     information on classes, function parameters, local variable types, and much
     more.

   Having this kind of information completely changes the reversing experi-
ence because it brings us much closer to the original high-level representation
of the program. In fact, this information allows for the creation of highly effec-
tive decompilers that can reconstruct remarkably readable high-level lan-
guage representations from bytecode executables. This situation is true for
both Java and .NET programs, and it presents a problem to software vendors
working on those platforms, who have a hard time protecting their executa-
bles from being easily reverse engineered. The solution in most cases is to use
obfuscators—programs that try to eliminate as much sensitive information
from the executable as possible (while keeping it functional).
   Depending on the specific platform and on how aggressively an executable
is obfuscated, reversers have two options: they can either use a decompiler to
reconstruct a high-level representation of the target program or they can learn
the native low-level language in which the program is presented and simply
read that code and attempt to determine the program’s design and purpose.
Luckily, these bytecode languages are typically fairly easy to deal with because
they are not as low-level as the average native processor assembly language.
Chapter 12 provides an introduction to Microsoft’s .NET platform and to its
native language, the Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL), and demonstrates
how to reverse programs written for the .NET platform.

Hardware Execution Environments in Modern Processors
Since this book focuses primarily on the reversing process for native IA-32 pro-
grams, it might make sense to take a quick look at how code is executed inside
these processors to see if you can somehow harness that information to your
advantage while reversing.
   In the early days of microprocessors things were much simpler. A micro-
processor was a collection of digital circuits that could perform a variety of
operations and was controlled using machine code that was read from mem-
ory. The processor’s runtime consisted simply of an endlessly repeating
sequence of reading an instruction from memory, decoding it, and triggering
the correct circuit to perform the operation specified in the machine code. The
important thing to realize is that execution was entirely serial. As the demand
for faster and more flexible microprocessors arose, microprocessor designers
were forced to introduce parallelism using a variety of techniques.
   The problem is that backward compatibility has always been an issue. For
example, newer version of IA-32 processors must still support the original IA-
32 instruction set. Normally this wouldn’t be a problem, but modern proces-
sors have significant support for parallel execution, which is difficult to
achieve considering that the instruction set wasn’t explicitly designed to sup-
port it. Because instructions were designed to run one after the other and not
in any other way, sequential instructions often have interdependencies which

     prevent parallelism. The general strategy employed by modern IA-32 proces-
     sors for achieving parallelism is to simply execute two or more instructions at
     the same time. The problems start when one instruction depends on informa-
     tion produced by the other. In such cases the instructions must be executed in
     their original order, in order to preserve the code’s functionality.
        Because of these restrictions, modern compilers employ a multitude of tech-
     niques for generating code that could be made to run as efficiently as possible
     on modern processors. This naturally has a strong impact on the readability of
     disassembled code while reversing. Understanding the rationale behind such
     optimization techniques might help you decipher such optimized code.
        The following sections discuss the general architecture of modern IA-32
     processors and how they achieve parallelism and high instruction throughput.

       This subject is optional and is discussed here because it is always best to know
       why things are as they are. In this case, having a general understanding of why
       optimized IA-32 code is arranged the way it is can be helpful when trying to
       decipher its meaning.

       IA-32 COMPATIBLE PROCESSORS

          Over the years, many companies have attempted to penetrate the lucrative
       IA-32 processor market (which has been completely dominated by Intel
       Corporation) by creating IA-32 compatible processors. The strategy has usually
       been to offer better-priced processors that are 100 percent compatible with
       Intel’s IA-32 processors and offer equivalent or improved performance. AMD
       (Advanced Micro Devices) has been the most successful company in this
       market, with an average market share of over 15 percent in the IA-32 processor
       market.
          While getting to know IA-32 assembly language there isn’t usually a need to
       worry about other brands because of their excellent compatibility with the Intel
       implementations. Even code that’s specifically optimized for Intel’s NetBurst
       architecture usually runs extremely well on other implementations such as the
       AMD processors, so that compilers rarely have to worry about specific
       optimizations for non-Intel processors.
          One substantial AMD-specific feature is the 3DNow! instruction set. 3DNow!
       defines a set of SIMD (single instruction multiple data) instructions that can
       perform multiple floating-point operations per clock cycle. 3DNow! stands in
       direct competition to Intel’s SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 (Streaming SIMD Extensions).
       In addition to supporting their own 3DNow! instruction set, AMD processors
       also support Intel’s SSE extensions in order to maintain compatibility. Needless
       to say, Intel processors don’t support 3DNow!.

Intel NetBurst
The Intel NetBurst microarchitecture is the current execution environment for
many of Intel’s modern IA-32 processors. Understanding the basic architec-
ture of NetBurst is important because it explains the rationale behind the opti-
mization guidelines used by almost every IA-32 code generator out there.

µops (Micro-Ops)
IA-32 processors use microcode for implementing each instruction supported
by the processor. Microcode is essentially another layer of programming that
lies within the processor. This means that the processor itself contains a much
more primitive core, only capable of performing fairly simple operations
(though at extremely high speeds). In order to implement the relatively com-
plex IA-32 instructions, the processor has a microcode ROM, which contains
the microcode sequences for every instruction in the instruction set.
   The process of constantly fetching instruction microcode from ROM can cre-
ate significant performance bottlenecks, so IA-32 processors employ an execu-
tion trace cache that is responsible for caching the microcodes of frequently
executed instructions.

Pipelines
Basically, a CPU pipeline is like a factory assembly line for decoding and exe-
cuting program instructions. An instruction enters the pipeline and is broken
down into several low-level tasks that must be taken care of by the processor.
  In NetBurst processors, the pipeline uses three primary stages:
  1. Front end: Responsible for decoding each instruction and producing
     sequences of µops that represent each instruction. These µops are then
     fed into the Out of Order Core.
  2. Out of Order Core: This component receives sequences of µοps from
     the front end and reorders them based on the availability of the various
     resources of the processor. The idea is to use the available resources as
     aggressively as possible to achieve parallelism. The ability to do this
     depends heavily on the original code fed to the front end. Given the
     right conditions, the core will actually emit multiple µops per clock
     cycle.
  3. Retirement section: The retirement section is primarily responsible for
     ensuring that the original order of instructions in the program is pre-
     served when applying the results of the out-of-order execution.

       In terms of the actual execution of operations, the architecture provides four
     execution ports (each with its own pipeline) that are responsible for the actual
     execution of instructions. Each unit has different capabilities, as shown in
     Figure 2.4.

                                           Port 0

                 Double Speed ALU                             Floating Point Move

                      ADD/SUB                                  Floating Point Moves
                  Logic Operations                             Floating Point Stores
                      Branches                           Floating Point Exchange (FXCH)
                Store Data Operations

                                           Port 1

           Double Speed ALU               Integer Unit             Floating Point Execute

                                                                    Floating Point Addition
                                                                  Floating Point Multiplication
                                        Shift and Rotate             Floating Point Division
               ADD/SUB
                                          Operations                  Other Floating Point
                                                                           Operations
                                                                        MMX Operations

                    Port 2                                             Port 3
                 Memory Loads                                      Memory Writes

                                                               Address Store Operations
                                                               (this component writes the
                All Memory Reads                               address to be written into
                                                              the bus, and does not send
                                                                     the actual data).

Figure 2.4 Issue ports and individual execution units in Intel NetBurst processors.

   Notice how port 0 and port 1 both have double-speed ALUs (arithmetic log-
ical units). This is a significant aspect of IA-32 optimizations because it means
that each ALU can actually perform two operations in a single clock cycle. For
example, it is possible to perform up to four additions or subtractions during
a single clock cycle (two in each double-speed ALU). On the other hand, non-
SIMD floating-point operations are pretty much guaranteed to take at least
one cycle because there is only one unit that actually performs floating-point
operations (and another unit that moves data between memory and the FPU
stack).
   Figure 2.4 can help shed light on instruction ordering and algorithms used by
NetBurst-aware compilers, because it provides a rationale for certain otherwise-
obscure phenomenon that we’ll be seeing later on in compiler-generated code
sequences.
   Most modern IA-32 compiler back ends can be thought of as NetBurst-
aware, in the sense that they take the NetBurst architecture into consideration
during the code generation process. This is going to be evident in many of the
code samples presented throughout this book.

Branch Prediction
One significant problem with the pipelined approach described earlier has to
do with the execution of branches. The problem is that processors that have a
deep pipeline must always know which instruction is going to be executed
next. Normally, the processor simply fetches the next instruction from memory
whenever there is room for it, but what happens when there is a conditional
branch in the code?
   Conditional branches are a problem because often their outcome is not
known at the time the next instruction must be fetched. One option would be
to simply wait before processing instructions currently in the pipeline until the
information on whether the branch is taken or not becomes available. This
would have a detrimental impact on performance because the processor only
performs at full capacity when the pipeline is full. Refilling the pipeline takes
a significant number of clock cycles, depending on the length of the pipeline
and on other factors.
   The solution to these problems is to try and predict the result of each condi-
tional branch. Based on this prediction the processor fills the pipeline with
instructions that are located either right after the branch instruction (when the
branch is not expected to be taken) or from the branch’s target address (when
the branch is expected to be taken). A missed prediction is usually expensive
and requires that the entire pipeline be emptied.
   The general prediction strategy is that backward branches that jump to an
earlier instruction are always expected to be taken because those are typically
used in loops, where for every iteration there will be a jump, and the only time

     such branch is not be taken is in the very last iteration. Forward branches (typ-
     ically used in if statements) are assumed to not be taken.
        In order to improve the processor’s prediction abilities, IA-32 processors
     employ a branch trace buffer (BTB) which records the results of the most recent
     branch instructions processed. This way when a branch is encountered, it is
     searched in the BTB. If an entry is found, the processor uses that information
     for predicting the branch.

     Conclusion
     In this chapter, we have introduced the concept of low-level software and gone
     over some basic materials required for successfully reverse engineering pro-
     grams. We have covered basic high-level software concepts and how they
     translate into the low-level world, and introduced assembly language, which
     is the native language of the reversing world. Additionally, we have covered
     some more hard core low-level topics that often affect the reverse-engineering
     process, such as compilers and execution environments. The next chapter pro-
     vides an introduction to some additional background materials and focuses on
     operating system fundamentals.
                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                    3

                    Windows Fundamentals

Operating systems play a key role in reversing. That’s because programs are
tightly integrated with operating systems, and plenty of information can be
gathered by probing this interface. Moreover, the eventual bottom line of
every program is in its communication with the outside world (the program
receives user input and outputs data on the screen, writes to a file, and so on),
which means that identifying and understanding the bridging points between
application programs and the operating system is critical.
   This chapter introduces the architecture of the latest generations of the
Microsoft Windows operating system, which is the operating system used
throughout this book. Some of this material is quite basic. If you feel perfectly
comfortable with operating systems in general and with the Windows archi-
tecture in particular, feel free to skip this chapter.
   It is important to realize that this discussion is really a brief overview of
information that could fill several thick books. I’ve tried to make it as complete
as possible and yet as focused on reversing as possible. If you feel as if you
need additional information on certain subjects discussed in this chapter I’ve
listed a couple of additional sources at the end of this chapter.

     Components and Basic Architecture
     Before getting into the details of how Windows works, let’s start by taking a
     quick look at how it evolved to its current architecture, and by listing its most
     fundamental features.

     Brief History
     As you probably know, there used to be two different operating systems called
     Windows: Windows and Windows NT. There was Windows, which was
     branded as Windows 95, Windows 98, and Windows Me and was a descen-
     dent of the old 16-bit versions of Windows. Windows NT was branded as Win-
     dows 2000 and more recently as Windows XP and Windows Server 2003.
     Windows NT is a more recent design that Microsoft initiated in the early 1990s.
     Windows NT was designed from the ground up as a 32-bit, virtual memory
     capable, multithreaded and multiprocessor-capable operating system, which
     makes it far more suited for use with modern-day hardware and software.
        Both operating systems were made compatible with the Win32 API, in order
     to make applications run on both operating systems. In 2001 Microsoft finally
     decided to eliminate the old Windows product (this should have happened
     much earlier in my opinion) and to only offer NT-based systems. The first
     general-public, consumer version of Windows NT was Windows XP, which
     offered a major improvement for Windows 9x users (and a far less significant
     improvement for users of its NT-based predecessor—Windows 2000). The
     operating system described in this chapter is essentially Windows XP, but
     most of the discussion deals with fundamental concepts that have changed
     very little between Windows NT 4.0 (which was released in 1996), and Win-
     dows Server 2003. It should be safe to assume that the materials in this chapter
     will be equally relevant to the upcoming Windows release (currently code-
     named “Longhorn”).

     Features
     The following are the basic features of the Windows NT architecture.
       Pure 32-bit Architecture Now that the transition to 64-bit computing is
         already well on the way this may not sound like much, but Windows NT
         is a pure 32-bit computing environment, free of old 16-bit relics. Current
         versions of the operating system are also available in 64-bit versions.
       Supports Virtual-Memory Windows NT’s memory manager employs a
         full-blown virtual-memory model. Virtual memory is discussed in detail
         later in this chapter.

  Portable Unlike the original Windows product, Windows NT was writ-
    ten in a combination of C and C++, which means that it can be recom-
    piled to run on different processor platforms. Additionally, any physical
    hardware access goes through a special Hardware Abstraction Layer
    (HAL), which isolates the system from the hardware and makes it easier
    to port the system to new hardware platforms.
  Multithreaded Windows NT is a fully preemptive, multithreaded sys-
   tem. While it is true that later versions of the original Windows product
   were also multithreaded, they still contained nonpreemptive compo-
   nents, such as the 16-bit implementations of USER and GDI (the Win-
   dows GUI components). These components had an adverse effect on
   those systems’ ability to achieve concurrency.
  Multiprocessor-Capable The Windows NT kernel is multiprocessor-
   capable, which means that it’s better suited for high-performance com-
   puting environments such as large data-center servers and other
   CPU-intensive applications.
  Secure Unlike older versions of Windows, Windows NT was designed
    with security in mind. Every object in the system has an associated
    Access Control List (ACL) that determines which users are allowed to
    manipulate it. The Windows NT File System (NTFS) also supports an
    ACL for each individual file, and supports encryption of individual files
    or entire volumes.
  Compatible Windows NT is reasonably compatible with older applica-
    tions and is capable of running 16-bit Windows applications and some
    DOS applications as well. Old applications are executed in a special iso-
    lated virtual machine where they cannot jeopardize the rest of the system.

Supported Hardware
Originally, Windows NT was designed as a cross-platform operating system,
and was released for several processor architectures, including IA-32, DEC
Alpha, and several others. With recent versions of the operating system, the
only supported 32-bit platform has been IA-32, but Microsoft now also sup-
ports 64-bit architectures such as AMD64, Intel IA-64, and Intel EMT64.

Memory Management
This discussion is specific to the 32-bit versions of Windows. The fact is that
64-bit versions of Windows are significantly different from a reversing stand-
point, because 64-bit processors (regardless of which specific architecture) use

     a different assembly language. Focusing exclusively on 32-bit versions of Win-
     dows makes sense because this book only deals with the IA-32 assembly lan-
     guage. It looks like it is still going to take 64-bit systems a few years to become
     a commodity. I promise I will update this book when that happens!

     Virtual Memory and Paging
     Virtual memory is a fundamental concept in contemporary operating systems.
     The idea is that instead of letting software directly access physical memory, the
     processor, in combination with the operating system, creates an invisible layer
     between the software and the physical memory. For every memory access, the
     processor consults a special table called the page table that tells the process
     which physical memory address to actually use. Of course, it wouldn’t be
     practical to have a table entry for each byte of memory (such a table would be
     larger than the total available physical memory), so instead processors divide
     memory into pages.
        Pages are just fixed-size chunks of memory; each entry in the page table
     deals with one page of memory. The actual size of a page of memory differs
     between processor architectures, and some architectures support more than
     one page size. IA-32 processors generally use 4K pages, though they also sup-
     port 2 MB and 4 MB pages. For the most part Windows uses 4K pages, so you
     can generally consider that to be the default page size.
        When first thinking about this concept, you might not immediately see the
     benefits of using a page table. There are several advantages, but the most
     important one is that it enables the creation of multiple address spaces. An
     address space is an isolated page table that only allows access to memory that
     is pertinent to the current program or process. Because the process prevents
     the application from accessing the page table, it is impossible for the process to
     break this boundary. The concept of multiple address spaces is a fundamental
     feature in modern operating systems, because it ensures that programs are
     completely isolated from one another and that each process has its own little
     “sandbox” to run in.
        Beyond address spaces, the existence of a page table also means that it is
     very easy to instruct the processor to enforce certain rules on how memory is
     accessed. For example, page-table entries often have a set of flags that deter-
     mine certain properties regarding the specific entry such as whether it is acces-
     sible from nonprivileged mode. This means that the operating system code can
     actually reside inside the process’s address space and simply set a flag in the
     page-table entries that restricts the application from ever accessing the operat-
     ing system’s sensitive data.
        This brings us to the fundamental concepts of kernel mode versus user mode.
     Kernel mode is basically the Windows term for the privileged processor mode
     and is frequently used for describing code that runs in privileged mode or

memory that is only accessible while the processor is in privileged mode. User
mode is the nonprivileged mode: when the system is in user mode, it can only
run user-mode code and can only access user-mode memory.

Paging
Paging is a process whereby memory regions are temporarily flushed to the
hard drive when they are not in use. The idea is simple: because physical
memory is much faster and much more expensive than hard drive space, it
makes sense to use a file for backing up memory areas when they are not in
use. Think of a system that’s running many applications. When some of these
applications are not in use, instead of keeping the entire applications in phys-
ical memory, the virtual memory architecture enables the system to dump all
of that memory to a file and simply load it back as soon as it is needed. This
process is entirely transparent to the application.
   Internally, paging is easy to implement on virtual memory systems. The sys-
tem must maintain some kind of measurement on when a page was last
accessed (the processor helps out with this) and use that information to locate
pages that haven’t been used in a while. Once such pages are located, the sys-
tem can flush their contents to a file and invalidate their page-table entries.
The contents of these pages in physical memory can then be discarded and the
space can be used for other purposes.
   Later, when the flushed pages are accessed, the processor will generate page
fault (because their page-table entries are invalid), and the system will know
that they have been paged out. At this point the operating system will access
the paging file (which is where all paged-out memory resides), and read the
data back into memory.
   One of the powerful side effects of this design is that applications can actu-
ally use more memory than is physically available, because the system can use
the hard drive for secondary storage whenever there is not enough physical
memory. In reality, this only works when applications don’t actively use more
memory than is physically available, because in such cases the system would
have to move data back and forth between physical memory and the hard
drive. Because hard drives are generally about 1,000 times slower than physi-
cal memory, such situations can cause systems to run incredibly slowly.

Page Faults
From the processor’s perspective, a page fault is generated whenever a mem-
ory address is accessed that doesn’t have a valid page-table entry. As end
users, we’ve grown accustomed to the thought that a page-fault equals bad
news. That’s akin to saying that a bacterium equals bad news to the human

     body; nothing could be farther from the truth. Page faults have a bad reputa-
     tion because any program or system crash is usually accompanied by a mes-
     sage informing us of an unhandled page fault. In reality, page faults are
     triggered thousands of times each second in a healthy system. In most cases,
     the system deals with such page faults as a part of its normal operations. A
     good example of a legitimate page fault is when a page has been paged out to
     the paging file and is being accessed by a program. Because the page’s page-
     table entry is invalid, the processor generates a page fault, which the operating
     system resolves by simply loading the page’s contents from the paging file and
     resuming the program that originally triggered the fault.

     Working Sets
     A working set is a per-process data structure that lists the current physical
     pages that are in use in the process’s address space. The system uses working
     sets to determine each process’s active use of physical memory and which
     memory pages have not been accessed in a while. Such pages can then be
     paged out to disk and removed from the process’s working set.
        It can be said that the memory usage of a process at any given moment can
     be measured as the total size of its working set. That’s generally true, but is a
     bit of an oversimplification because significant chunks of the average process
     address space contain shared memory, which is also counted as part of the
     total working set size. Measuring memory usage in a virtual memory system
     is not a trivial task!

     Kernel Memory and User Memory
     Probably the most important concept in memory management is the distinc-
     tions between kernel memory and user memory. It is well known that in order
     to create a robust operating system, applications must not be able to access the
     operating system’s internal data structures. That’s because we don’t want a
     single programmer’s bug to overwrite some important data structure and
     destabilize the entire system. Additionally, we want to make sure malicious
     software can’t take control of the system or harm it by accessing critical oper-
     ating system data structures.
        Windows uses a 32-bit (4 gigabytes) memory address that is typically
     divided into two 2-GB portions: a 2-GB application memory portion, and a
     2-GB shared kernel-memory portion. There are several cases where 32-bit sys-
     tems use a different memory layout, but these are not common. The general
     idea is that the upper 2 GB contain all kernel-related memory in the system
     and are shared among all address spaces. This is convenient because it means

that the kernel memory is always available, regardless of which process is cur-
rently running. The upper 2 GB are, of course, protected from any user-mode
access.
   One side effect of this design is that applications only have a 31-bit address
space—the most significant bit is always clear in every address. This provides
a tiny reversing hint: A 32-bit number whose first hexadecimal digit is 8 or
above is not a valid user-mode pointer.

The Kernel Memory Space
So what goes on inside those 2 GB reserved for the kernel? Those 2 GB are
divided between the various kernel components. Primarily, the kernel space
contains all of the system’s kernel code, including the kernel itself and any
other kernel components in the system such as device drivers and the like.
Most of the 2 GB are divided among several significant system components.
The division is generally static, but there are several registry keys that can
somewhat affect the size of some of these areas. Figure 3.1 shows a typical lay-
out of the Windows kernel address space. Keep in mind that most of the com-
ponents have a dynamic size that can be determined in runtime based on the
available physical memory and on several user-configurable registry keys.
  Paged and Nonpaged Pools The paged pool and nonpaged pool are
    essentially kernel-mode heaps that are used by all the kernel compo-
    nents. Because they are stored in kernel memory, the pools are inher-
    ently available in all address spaces, but are only accessible from kernel
    mode code. The paged pool is a (fairly large) heap that is made up of
    conventional paged memory. The paged pool is the default allocation
    heap for most kernel components.The nonpaged pool is a heap that is
    made up of nonpageable memory. Nonpagable memory means that the
    data can never be flushed to the hard drive and is always kept in physi-
    cal memory. This is beneficial because significant areas of the system are
    not allowed to use pagable memory.
  System Cache The system cache space is where the Windows cache man-
    ager maps all currently cached files. Caching is implemented in Win-
    dows by mapping files into memory and allowing the memory manager
    to manage the amount of physical memory allocated to each mapped
    file. When a program opens a file, a section object (see below) is created
    for it, and it is mapped into the system cache area. When the program
    later accesses the file using the ReadFile or WriteFile APIs, the file
    system internally accesses the mapped copy of the file using cache man-
    ager APIs such as CcCopyRead and CcCopyWrite.

     0x80000000
                                     Kernel Code
     0x8073B000

     0x80DA6000
                                  Non-Paged Pool
                            12Mb (Actual size calculated in
                                      runtime)
     0x819A6000

                                Additional System PTEs
                           (Actual size calculated in runtime)

     0xBE000000
                           Te rminal Services Session Space
                                 32 Mb (session-private)
     0xC0000000
                            Page Tables (process-private)
     0xC0400000
                            Hyper Space (process-private)
     0xC0800000

     0xC0C00000
                                 System Working Set
                                        4Mb
     0xC1000000
                                 System Cache Space
                                       512Mb
     0xE1000000
                                    Paged Pool
                           192Mb (Actual size calculated in
                                     runtime)
     0xED000000
                                   System PTEs
                           200Mb (Actual size calculated in
                                     runtime)
     0xF96A8000
                               Extra Non-Paged Pool
                           100Mb (Actual size calculated in
                                      runtime)
     0xFFBE0000
Figure 3.1 A typical layout of the Windows kernel memory address space.

       Terminal Services Session Space This memory area is used by the kernel
         mode component of the Win32 subsystem: WIN32K.SYS (see the section
         on the Win32 subsystem later in this chapter). The Terminal Services
         component is a Windows service that allows for multiple, remote GUI

    sessions on a single Windows system. In order to implement this feature,
    Microsoft has made the Win32 memory space “session private,” so that
    the system can essentially load multiple instances of the Win32 subsys-
    tem. In the kernel, each instance is loaded into the same virtual address,
    but in a different session space. The session space contains the
    WIN32K.SYS executable, and various data structures required by the
    Win32 subsystem. There is also a special session pool, which is essentially
    a session private paged pool that also resides in this region.
  Page Tables and Hyper Space These two regions contain process-specific
    data that defines the current process’s address space. The page-table
    area is simply a virtual memory mapping of the currently active page
    tables. The Hyper Space is used for several things, but primarily for
    mapping the current process’s working set.
  System Working Set The system working set is a system-global data
    structure that manages the system’s physical memory use (for pageable
    memory only). It is needed because large parts of the contents of the ker-
    nel memory address space are pageable, so the system must have a way
    of keeping track of the pages that are currently in use. The two largest
    memory regions that are managed by this data structure are the paged
    pool and the system cache.
  System Page-Table Entries (PTE) This is a large region that is used for
    large kernel allocations of any kind. This is not a heap, but rather just a
    virtual memory space that can be used by the kernel and by drivers
    whenever they need a large chunk of virtual memory, for any purpose.
    Internally, the kernel uses the System PTE space for mapping device dri-
    ver executables and for storing kernel stacks (there is one for each thread
    in the system). Device drivers can allocate System PTE regions by calling
    the MmAllocateMappingAddress kernel API.

Section Objects
The section object is a key element of the Windows memory manager. Gener-
ally speaking a section object is a special chunk of memory that is managed by
the operating system. Before the contents of a section object can be accessed,
the object must be mapped. Mapping a section object means that a virtual
address range is allocated for the object and that it then becomes accessible
through that address range.
   One of the key properties of section objects is that they can be mapped to
more than one place. This makes section objects a convenient tool for applica-
tions to share memory between them. The system also uses section objects to
share memory between the kernel and user-mode processes. This is done by

     mapping the same section object into both the kernel address space and one or
     more user-mode address spaces. Finally, it should be noted that the term “sec-
     tion object” is a kernel concept—in Win32 (and in most of Microsoft’s docu-
     mentation) they are called memory mapped files.
        There are two basic types of section objects:
       Pagefile-Backed A pagefile-backed section object can be used for tempo-
         rary storage of information, and is usually created for the purpose of
         sharing data between two processes or between applications and the
         kernel. The section is created empty, and can be mapped to any address
         space (both in user memory and in kernel memory). Just like any other
         paged memory region, a pagefile-backed section can be paged out to a
         pagefile if required.
       File-Backed A file-backed section object is attached to a physical file on
          the hard drive. This means that when it is first mapped, it will contain the
          contents of the file to which it is attached. If it is writable, any changes
          made to the data while the object is mapped into memory will be written
          back into the file. A file-backed section object is a convenient way of
          accessing a file, because instead of using cumbersome APIs such as
          ReadFile and WriteFile, a program can just directly access the data
          in memory using a pointer. The system uses file-backed section objects
          for a variety of purposes, including the loading of executable images.

     VAD Trees
     A Virtual Address Descriptor (VAD) tree is the data structure used by Windows
     for managing each individual process’s address allocation. The VAD tree is
     a binary tree that describes every address range that is currently in use. Each
     process has its own individual tree, and within those trees each entry describes
     the memory allocation in question. Generally speaking, there are two distinct
     kinds of allocations: mapped allocations and private allocations. Mapped allo-
     cations are memory-mapped files that are mapped into the address space. This
     includes all executables loaded into the process address space and every
     memory-mapped file (section object) mapped into the address space. Private
     allocations are allocations that are process private and were allocated locally.
     Private allocations are typically used for heaps and stacks (there can be multi-
     ple stacks in a single process—one for each thread).

     User-Mode Allocations
     Let’s take a look at what goes on in user-mode address spaces. Of course we
     can’t be as specific as we were in our earlier discussion of the kernel address

space—every application is different. Still, it is important to understand how
applications use memory and how to detect different memory types.
  Private Allocations Private allocations are the most basic type of mem-
    ory allocation in a process. This is the simple case where an application
    requests a memory block using the VirtualAlloc Win32 API. This is
    the most primitive type of memory allocation, because it can only allo-
    cate whole pages and nothing smaller than that. Private allocations are
    typically used by the system for allocating stacks and heaps (see below).
  Heaps Most Windows applications don’t directly call VirtualAlloc—
   instead they allocate a heap block by calling a runtime library function
   such as malloc or by calling a system heap API such as HeapAlloc. A
   heap is a data structure that enables the creation of multiple variable-
   sized blocks of memory within a larger block. Interally, a heap tries to
   manage the available memory wisely so that applications can conve-
   niently allocate and free variable-sized blocks as required. The operating
   system offers its own heaps through the HeapAlloc and HeapFree
   Win32 APIs, but an application can also implement its own heaps by
   directly allocating private blocks using the VirtualAlloc API.
  Stacks User-mode stacks are essentially regular private allocations, and
    the system allocates a stack automatically for every thread while it is
    being created.
  Executables Another common allocation type is a mapped executable
    allocation. The system runs application code by loading it into memory
    as a memory-mapped file.
  Mapped Views (Sections) Applications can create memory-mapped files
   and map them into their address space. This is a convenient and com-
   monly used method for sharing memory between two or more programs.

Memory Management APIs
The Windows Virtual Memory Manager is accessible to application programs
using a set of Win32 APIs that can directly allocate and free memory blocks in
user-mode address spaces. The following are the popular Win32 low-level
memory management APIs.
  VirtualAlloc This function allocates a private memory block within a
    user-mode address space. This is a low-level memory block whose size
    must be page-aligned; this is not a variable-sized heap block such as
    those allocated by malloc (the C runtime library heap function). A
    block can be either reserved or actually committed. Reserving a block
    means that we simply reserve the address space but don’t actually use

         up any memory. Committing a block means that we actually allocate
         space for it in the system page file. No physical memory will be used
         until the memory is actually accessed.
       VirtualProtect This function sets a memory region’s protection settings,
         such as whether the block is readable, writable, or executable (newer
         versions of Windows actually prevent the execution of nonexecutable
         blocks). It is also possible to use this function to change other low-level
         settings such whether the block is cached by the hardware or not, and
         so on.
       VirtualQuery This function queries the current memory block (essen-
         tially retrieving information for the block’s VAD node) for various
         details such as what type of block it is (a private allocation, a section, or
         an image), and whether its reserved, committed, or unused.
       VirtualFree This function frees a private allocation block (like those allo-
         cated using VirtualAlloc).
        All of these APIs deal with the currently active address space, but Windows
     also supports virtual-memory operations on other processes, if the process is
     privileged enough to do that. All of the APIs listed here have an Ex version
     (VirtualAllocEx, VirtualQueryEx, and so on.) that receive a handle
     to a process object and can operate on the address spaces of processes other
     than the one currently running. As part of that same functionality, Windows
     also offers two APIs that actually access another process’s address space
     and can read or write to it. These APIs are ReadProcessMemory and
     WriteProcessMemory.
        Another group of important memory-manager APIs is the section object
     APIs. In Win32 a section object is called a memory-mapped file and can be cre-
     ated using the CreateFileMapping API. A section object can be mapped
     into the user-mode address space using the MapViewOfFileEx API, and can
     be unmapped using the UnmapViewOfFile API.

     Objects and Handles
     The Windows kernel manages objects using a centralized object manager com-
     ponent. The object manager is responsible for all kernel objects such as sec-
     tions, file, and device objects, synchronization objects, processes, and threads.
     It is important to understand that this component only manages kernel-related
     objects. GUI-related objects such as windows, menus, and device contexts
     are managed by separate object managers that are implemented inside
     WIN32K.SYS. These are discussed in the section on the Win32 Subsystem later
     in this chapter.

   Viewing objects from user mode, as most applications do, gives them a
somewhat mysterious aura. It is important to understand that under the hood
all of these objects are merely data structures—they are typically stored in non-
paged pool kernel memory. All objects use a standard object header that
describes the basic object properties such as its type, reference count, name,
and so on. The object manager is not aware of any object-specific data struc-
tures, only of the generic header.
   Kernel code typically accesses objects using direct pointers to the object data
structures, but application programs obviously can’t do that. Instead, applica-
tions use handles for accessing individual objects. A handle is a process specific
numeric identifier which is essentially an index into the process’s private han-
dle table. Each entry in the handle table contains a pointer to the underlying
object, which is how the system associates handles with objects. Along with
the object pointer, each handle entry also contains an access mask that deter-
mines which types of operations that can be performed on the object using this
specific handle. Figure 3.2 demonstrates how process each have their own
handle tables and how they point to the actual objects in kernel memory.
   The object’s access mask is a 32-bit integer that is divided into two 16-bit
access flag words. The upper word contains generic access flags such as
GENERIC_READ and GENERIC_WRITE. The lower word contains object spe-
cific flags such as PROCESS_TERMINATE, which allows you to terminate a
process using its handle, or KEY_ENUMERATE_SUB_KEYS, which allows you
to enumerate the subkeys of an open registry key. All access rights constants
are defined in WinNT.H in the Microsoft Platform SDK.
   For every object, the kernel maintains two reference counts: a kernel refer-
ence count and a handle count. Objects are only deleted once they have zero
kernel references and zero handles.

Named objects
Some kernel objects can be named, which provides a way to uniquely identify
them throughout the system. Suppose, for example, that two processes are
interested in synchronizing a certain operation between them. A typical
approach is to use a mutex object, but how can they both know that they are
dealing with the same mutex? The kernel supports object names as a means of
identification for individual objects. In our example both processes could try
to create a mutex named MyMutex. Whoever does that first will actually cre-
ate the MyMutex object, and the second program will just open a new handle
to the object. The important thing is that using a common name effectively
guarantees that both processes are dealing with the same object. When an
object creation API such as CreateMutex is called for an object that already
exists, the kernel automatically locates that object in the global table and
returns a handle to it.
                             Process 292                           Process 188

          User-Mode

         Kernel-Mode
                                                  Object Manager Header

                                                   Object A: Specifc Data
                                                         Structure
    Process Handle Table (PID 292)                                               Process Handle Table (PID 188)
                  Access Mask:                                                                 Access Mask:
    Handle 0x4:                  Object Pointer                                  Handle 0x4:                  Object Pointer
                   Read Write                     Object Manager Header                         RW, Delete

                  Access Mask:                                                                 Access Mask:
    Handle 0x8:                  Object Pointer    Object B: Specifc Data        Handle 0x8:                  Object Pointer
                   Read Only                                                                    Read Only
                                                         Structure

                  Access Mask:                                                                 Access Mask:
    Handle 0xC:                  Object Pointer                                  Handle 0xC:                  Object Pointer
                    All Rights                                                                   All Rights
                                                  Object Manager Header
                  Access Mask:
   Handle 0x10:                  Object Pointer                                      ...            ...             ...
                    All Rights
                                                   Object C: Specifc Data
                                                          Structure
        ...            ...             ...

                                                  Object Manager Header

                                                   Object D: Specifc Data
                                                          Structure

                                                  Object Manager Header

                                                   Object E: Specifc Data
                                                         Structure

Figure 3.2 Objects and process handle tables.

  Named objects are arranged in hierarchical directories, but the Win32 API
restricts user-mode applications’ access to these directories. Here’s a quick
run-though of the most interesting directories:
  BaseNamedObjects This directory is where all conventional Win32
    named objects, such as mutexes, are stored. All named-object Win32
    APIs automatically use this directory—application programs have no
    control over this.
  Devices This directory contains the device objects for all currently active
   system devices. Generally speaking each device driver has at least one
   entry in this directory, even those that aren’t connected to any physical
   device. This includes logical devices such as Tcp, and physical devices
   such as Harddisk0. Win32 APIs can never directly access object in this
   directory—they must use symbolic links (see below).
  GLOBAL?? This directory (also named ?? in older versions of Windows)
   is the symbolic link directory. Symbolic links are old-style names for ker-
   nel objects. Old-style naming is essentially the DOS naming scheme,
   which you’ve surely used. Think about assigning each drive a letter,
   such as C:, and about accessing physical devices using an 8-letter name
   that ends with a colon, such as COM1:. These are all DOS names, and in
   modern versions of Windows they are linked to real devices in the
   Devices directory using symbolic links. Win32 applications can only
   access devices using their symbolic link names.
  Some kernel objects are unnamed and are only identified by their handles or
kernel object pointers. A good example of such an object is a thread object,
which is created without a name and is only represented by handles (from user
mode) and by a direct pointer into the object (from kernel mode).

Processes and Threads
Processes and threads are both basic structural units in Windows, and it is cru-
cial that you understand exactly what they represent. The following sections
describe the basic concepts of processes and threads and proceed to discuss
the details of how they are implemented in Windows.

     Processes
     A process is a fundamental building block in Windows. A process is many
     things, but it is predominantly an isolated memory address space. This
     address space can be used for running a program, and address spaces are cre-
     ated for every program in order to make sure that each program runs in its
     own address space. Inside a process’s address space the system can load code
     modules, but in order to actually run a program, a process must have at least
     one thread running.

     Threads
     A thread is a primitive code execution unit. At any given moment, each proces-
     sor in the system is running one thread, which effectively means that it’s just
     running a piece of code; this can be either program or operating system code,
     it doesn’t matter. The idea with threads is that instead of continuing to run a
     single piece of code until it is completed, Windows can decide to interrupt a
     running thread at any given moment and switch to another thread. This
     process is at the very heart of Windows’ ability to achieve concurrency.
        It might make it easier to understand what threads are if you consider how
     they are implemented by the system. Internally, a thread is nothing but a data
     structure that has a CONTEXT data structure telling the system the state of the
     processor when the thread last ran, combined with one or two memory blocks
     that are used for stack space. When you think about it, a thread is like a little
     virtual processor that has its own context and its own stack. The real physical
     processor switches between multiple virtual processors and always starts exe-
     cution from the thread’s current context information and using the thread’s
     stack.
        The reason a thread can have two stacks is that in Windows threads alternate
     between running user-mode code and kernel-mode code. For instance, a typi-
     cal application thread runs in user mode, but it can call into system APIs that
     are implemented in kernel mode. In such cases the system API code runs in
     kernel mode from within the calling thread! Because the thread can run in both
     user mode and kernel mode it must have two stacks: one for when it’s running
     in user mode and one for when it’s running in kernel mode. Separating the
     stacks is a basic security and robustness requirement. If user-mode code had
     access to kernel stacks the system would be vulnerable to a variety of mali-
     cious attacks and its stability could be compromised by application bugs that
     could overwrite parts of a kernel stack.
        The components that manage threads in Windows are the scheduler and the
     dispatcher, which are together responsible for deciding which thread gets to
     run for how long, and for performing the actual context switch when its time to
     change the currently running thread.

   An interesting aspect of the Windows architecture is that the kernel is pre-
emptive and interruptible, meaning that a thread can usually be interrupted
while running in kernel mode just as it can be interrupted while running in
user mode. For example, virtually every Win32 API is interruptible, as are
most internal kernel components. Unsurprisingly, there are some components
or code areas that can’t be interrupted (think of what would happen if the
scheduler itself got interrupted . . .), but these are usually very brief passages
of code.

Context Switching
People sometimes find it hard to envision the process of how a multithreaded
kernel achieves concurrency with multiple threads, but it’s really quite simple.
The first step is for the kernel to let a thread run. All this means in reality is to
load its context (this means entering the correct memory address space and ini-
tializing the values of all CPU registers) and let it start running. The thread
then runs normally on the processor (the kernel isn’t doing anything special at
this point), until the time comes to switch to a new thread. Before we discuss
the actual process of switching contexts, let’s talk about how and why a thread
is interrupted.
   The truth is that threads frequently just give up the CPU on their own voli-
tion, and the kernel doesn’t even have to actually interrupt them. This hap-
pens whenever a program is waiting for something. In Windows one of the
most common examples is when a program calls the GetMessage Win32 API.
GetMessage is called all the time—it is how applications ask the system if the
user has generated any new input events (such as touching the mouse or key-
board). In most cases, GetMessage accesses a message queue and just extracts
the next event, but in some cases there just aren’t any messages in the queue.
In such cases, GetMessage just enters a waiting mode and doesn’t return
until new user input becomes available. Effectively what happens at this point
is that GetMessage is telling the kernel: “I’m all done for now, wake me up
when a new input event comes in.” At this point the kernel saves the entire
processor state and switches to run another thread. This makes a lot of sense
because one wouldn’t want the processor to just stall because a single program
is idling at the moment—perhaps other programs could use the CPU.
   Of course, GetMessage is just an example—there are dozens of other cases.
Consider for example what happens when an applications performs a slow
I/O operation such as reading data from the network or from a relatively slow
storage device such as a DVD. Instead of just waiting for the operation to com-
plete, the kernel switches to run another thread while the hardware is per-
forming the operation. The kernel then goes back to running that thread when
the operation is completed.

        What happens when a thread doesn’t just give up the processor? This could
     easily happen if it just has a lot of work to do. Think of a thread performing
     some kind of complex algorithm that involves billions of calculations. Such
     code could take hours before relinquishing the CPU—and could theoretically
     jam the entire system. To avoid such problems operating systems use what’s
     called preemptive scheduling, which means that threads are given a limited
     amount of time to run before they are interrupted.
        Every thread is assigned a quantum, which is the maximum amount of time
     the thread is allowed to run continuously. While a thread is running, the oper-
     ating system uses a low-level hardware timer interrupt to monitor how long
     it’s been running. Once the thread’s quantum is up, it is temporarily inter-
     rupted, and the system allows other threads to run. If no other threads need
     the CPU, the thread is immediately resumed. The process of suspending and
     resuming the thread is completely transparent to the thread—the kernel stores
     the state of all CPU registers before suspending the thread and restores that
     state when the thread is resumed. This way the thread has no idea that is was
     ever interrupted.

     Synchronization Objects
     For software developers, the existence of threads is a mixed blessing. On one
     hand, threads offer remarkable flexibility when developing a program; on the
     other hand, synchronizing multiple threads within the same programs is not
     easy, especially because they almost always share data structures between
     them. Probably one of the most important aspects of designing multithreaded
     software is how to properly design data structures and locking mechanisms
     that will ensure data validity at all times.
       The basic design of all synchronization objects is that they allow two or
     more threads to compete for a single resource, and they help ensure that only
     a controlled number of threads actually access the resource at any given
     moment. Threads that are blocked are put in a special wait state by the kernel
     and are not dispatched until that wait state is satisfied. This is the reason why
     synchronization objects are implemented by the operating system; the sched-
     uler must be aware of their existence in order to know when a wait state has
     been satisfied and a specific thread can continue execution.
       Windows supports several built-in synchronization objects, each suited to
     specific types of data structures that need to be protected. The following are
     the most commonly used ones:
       Events An event is a simple Boolean synchronization object that can be
         set to either True or False. An event is waited on by one of the standard
         Win32 wait APIs such as WaitForSingleObject or WaitForMulti-
         pleObjects.

  Mutexes A mutex (from mutually exclusive) is an object that can only be
   acquired by one thread at any given moment. Any threads that attempt
   to acquire a mutex while it is already owned by another thread will
   enter a wait state until the original thread releases the mutex or until it
   terminates. If more than one thread is waiting, they will each receive
   ownership of the mutex in the original order in which they requested it.
  Semaphores A semaphore is like a mutex with a user-defined counter
    that defines how many simultaneous owners are allowed on it. Once
    that maximum number is exceeded, a thread that requests ownership of
    the semaphore will enter a wait state until one of the threads release the
    semaphore.
  Critical Sections A critical section is essentially an optimized implemen-
    tation of a mutex. It is logically identical to a mutex, but with the differ-
    ence that it is process private and that most of it is implemented in user
    mode. All of the synchronization objects described above are managed
    by the kernel’s object manager and implemented in kernel mode, which
    means that the system must switch into the kernel for any operation that
    needs to be performed on them. A critical section is implemented in user
    mode, and the system only switches to kernel mode if an actual wait is
    necessary.

Process Initialization Sequence
In many reversing experiences, I’ve found that it’s important to have an
understanding of what happens when a process is started. The following pro-
vides a brief description of the steps taken by the system in an average process
creation sequence.
  1. The creation of the process object and new address space is the first
     step: When a process calls the Win32 API CreateProcess, the API
     creates a process object and allocates a new memory address space for
     the process.
  2. CreateProcess maps NTDLL.DLL and the program executable
     (the .exe file) into the newly created address space.
  3. CreateProcess creates the process’s first thread and allocates stack
     space for it.
  4. The process’s first thread is resumed and starts running in the
     LdrpInitialize function inside NTDLL.DLL.
  5. LdrpInitialize recursively traverses the primary executable’s
     import tables and maps into memory every executable that is required
     for running the primary executable.

       6. At this point control is passed into LdrpRunInitializeRoutines,
          which is an internal NTDLL.DLL routine responsible for initializing all
          statically linked DLLs currently loaded into the address space. The ini-
          tialization process consists of calling each DLL’s entry point with the
          DLL_PROCESS_ATTACH constant.
       7. Once all DLLs are initialized, LdrpInitialize calls the thread’s real
          initialization routine, which is the BaseProcessStart function from
          KERNEL32.DLL. This function in turn calls the executable’s WinMain
          entry point, at which point the process has completed its initialization
          sequence.

     Application Programming Interfaces
     An application programming interface (API) is a set of functions that the operat-
     ing system makes available to application programs for communicating with
     the operating system. If you’re going to be reversing under Windows, it is
     imperative that you develop a solid understanding of the Windows APIs and of
     the common methods of doing things using these APIs.

     The Win32 API
     I’m sure you’ve heard about the Win32 API. The Win32 is a very large set of
     functions that make up the official low-level programming interface for Win-
     dows applications. Initially when Windows was introduced, numerous pro-
     grams were actually developed using the Win32 API, but as time went by
     Microsoft introduced simpler, higher-level interfaces that exposed most of the
     features offered by the Win32 API. The most well known of those interfaces is
     MFC (Microsoft Foundation Classes), which is a hierarchy of C++ objects that
     can be used for interacting with Windows. Internally, MFC uses the Win32 API
     for actually calling into the operating system. These days, Microsoft is pro-
     moting the use of the .NET Framework for developing Windows applications.
     The .NET Framework uses the System class for accessing operating system
     services, which is again an interface into the Win32 API.
        The reason for the existence of all of those artificial upper layers is that the
     Win32 API is not particularly programmer-friendly. Many operations require
     calling a sequence of functions, often requiring the initialization of large data
     structures and flags. Many programmers get frustrated quickly when using
     the Win32 API. The upper layers are much more convenient to use, but they
     incur a certain performance penalty, because every call to the operating system
     has to go through the upper layer. Sometimes the upper layers do very little,
     and at other times they contain a significant amount of “bridging” code.

   If you’re going to be doing serious reversing of Windows applications, it is
going to be important for you to understand the Win32 API. That’s because no
matter which high-level interface an application employs (if any), it is eventu-
ally going to use the Win32 API for communicating with the OS. Some appli-
cations will use the native API, but that’s quite rare—see section below on the
native API.
   The Core Win32 API contains roughly 2000 APIs (it depends on the specific
Windows version and on whether or not you count undocumented Win32
APIs). These APIs are divided into three categories: Kernel, USER, and GDI.
Figure 3.3 shows the relation between the Win32 interface DLLs, NTDLL.DLL,
and the kernel components.

        KERNEL32.DLL
        BASE API Client                         Application Modules
          Component

                                Application Process

                                     USER32.DLL                  GDI32.DLL
          NTDLL.DLL
                                    The USER API                GDI API Client
      Native API Interface
                                   Client Component              Component

User-Mode

Kernel-Mode

                                                        WIN32K.SYS
               NTOSKRNL.EXE
                                                      The Win32 Kernel
              The Windows Kernel
                                                       Implementation

Figure 3.3 The Win32 interface DLLs and their relation to the kernel components.

       The following are the key components in the Win32 API:
       ■■   Kernel APIs (also called the BASE APIs) are implemented in the
            KERNEL32.DLL module and include all non-GUI-related services, such
            as file I/O, memory management, object management, process and
            thread management, and so on. KERNEL32.DLL typically calls low-
            level native APIs from NTDLL.DLL to implement the various services.
            Kernel APIs are used for creating and working with kernel-level objects
            such as files, synchronization objects, and so on, all of which are imple-
            mented in the system’s object manager discussed earlier.
       ■■   GDI APIs are implemented in the GDI32.DLL and include low-level
            graphics services such as those for drawing a line, displaying a bitmap,
            and so on. GDI is generally not aware of the existence of windows or
            controls. GDI APIs are primarily implemented in the kernel, inside the
            WIN32K.SYS module. GDI APIs make system calls into WIN32K.SYS
            to implement most APIs. The GDI revolves around GDI objects used for
            drawing graphics, such as device contexts, brushes, pens, and so on.
            These objects are not managed by the kernel’s object manager.
       ■■   USER APIs are implemented in the USER32.DLL module and include
            all higher-level GUI-related services such as window-management,
            menus, dialog boxes, user-interface controls, and so on. All GUI objects
            are drawn by USER using GDI calls to perform the actual drawing;
            USER heavily relies on GDI to do its business. USER APIs revolve
            around user-interface related objects such as windows, menus, and the
            like. These objects are not managed by the kernel’s object manager.

     The Native API
     The native API is the actual interface to the Windows NT system. In Windows
     NT the Win32 API is just a layer above the native API. Because the NT kernel
     has nothing to do with GUI, the native API doesn’t include any graphics-
     related services. In terms of functionality, the native API is the most direct
     interface into the Windows kernel, providing interfaces for direct interfacing
     with the memory manager, I/O System, object manager, processes and
     threads, and so on.
        Application programs are never supposed to directly call into the native
     API—that would break their compatibility with Windows 9x. This is one of the
     reasons why Microsoft never saw fit to actually document it; application pro-
     grams are expected to only use the Win32 APIs for interacting with the system.
     Also, by not exposing the native API, Microsoft retained the freedom to
     change and revise it without affecting Win32 applications.
