
   Sometimes calling or merely understanding a native API is crucial, in which
case it is always possible to reverse its implementation in order to determine
its purpose. If I had to make a guess I would say that now that the older ver-
sions of Windows are being slowly phased out, Microsoft won’t be so con-
cerned about developers using the native API and will soon publish some
level of documentation for it.
   Technically, the native API is a set of functions exported from both
NTDLL.DLL (for user-mode callers) and from NTOSKRNL.EXE (for kernel-
mode callers). APIs in the native API always start with one of two prefixes:
either Nt or Zw, so that functions have names like NtCreateFile or
ZwCreateFile. If you’re wondering what Zw stands for—I’m sorry, I have no
idea. The one thing I do know is that every native API has two versions, an Nt
version and a Zw version.
   In their user-mode implementation in NTDLL.DLL, the two groups of APIs
are identical and actually point to the same code. In kernel mode, they are dif-
ferent: the Nt versions are the actual implementations of the APIs, while the Zw
versions are stubs that go through the system-call mechanism. The reason you
would want to go through the system-call mechanism when calling an API
from kernel mode is to “prove” to the API being called that you’re actually
calling it from kernel mode. If you don’t do that, the API might think it is being
called from user-mode code and will verify that all parameters only contain
user-mode addresses. This is a safety mechanism employed by the system to
make sure user mode calls don’t corrupt the system by passing kernel-memory
pointers. For kernel-mode code, calling the Zw APIs is a way to simplify the
process of calling functions because you can pass regular kernel-mode pointers.
   If you’d like to use or simply understand the workings of the native API, it
has been almost fully documented by Gary Nebbett in Windows NT/2000
Native API Reference, Macmillan Technical Publishing, 2000, [Nebbett].

System Calling Mechanism
It is important to develop a basic understanding of the system calling
mechanism—you’re almost guaranteed to run into code that invokes system
calls if you ever step into an operating system API. A system call takes place
when user-mode code needs to call a kernel-mode function. This frequently
happens when an application calls an operating system API. The user-mode
side of the API usually performs basic parameter validation checks and calls
down into the kernel to actually perform the requested operation. It goes
without saying that it is not possible to directly call a kernel function from user
mode—that would create a serious vulnerability because applications could
call into invalid address within the kernel and crash the system, or even call
into an address that would allow them to take control of the system.

        This is why operating systems use a special mechanism for switching from
     user mode to kernel mode. The general idea is that the user-mode code
     invokes a special CPU instruction that tells the processor to switch to its priv-
     ileged mode (the CPUs terminology for kernel-mode execution) and call a spe-
     cial dispatch routine. This dispatch routine then calls the specific system
     function requested from user mode.
        The specific details of how this is implemented have changed after Win-
     dows 2000, so I’ll just quickly describe both methods. In Windows 2000 and
     earlier, the system would invoke interrupt 2E in order to call into the kernel.
     The following sequence is a typical Windows 2000 system call.

       ntdll!ZwReadFile:
       77f8c552 mov      eax,0xa1
       77f8c557 lea      edx,[esp+0x4]
       77f8c55b int      2e
       77f8c55d ret      0x24

        The EAX register is loaded with the service number (we’ll get to this in a
     minute), and EDX points to the first parameter that the kernel-mode function
     receives. When the int 2e instruction is invoked, the processor uses the inter-
     rupt descriptor table (IDT) in order to determine which interrupt handler to call.
     The IDT is a processor-owned table that tells the processor which routine to
     invoke whenever an interrupt or an exception takes place. The IDT entry for
     interrupt number 2E points to an internal NTOSKRNL function called KiSys-
     temService, which is the kernel service dispatcher. KiSystemService ver-
     ifies that the service number and stack pointer are valid and calls into the
     specific kernel function requested. The actual call is performed using the
     KiServiceTable array, which contains pointers to the various supported
     kernel services. KiSystemService simply uses the request number loaded
     into EAX as an index into KiServiceTable.
        More recent versions of the operating systems use an optimized version of
     the same mechanism. Instead of invoking an interrupt in order to perform the
     switch to kernel mode, the system now uses the special SYSENTER instruction
     in order to perform the switch. SYSENTER is essentially a high-performance
     kernel-mode switch instruction that calls into a predetermined function whose
     address is stored at a special model specific register (MSR) called
     SYSENTER_EIP_MSR. Needless to say, the contents of MSRs can only be
     accessed from kernel mode. Inside the kernel the new implementation is quite
     similar and goes through KiSystemService and KiServiceTable in the
     same way it did in Windows 2000 and older systems. The following is a typi-
     cal system API in recent versions of Windows such as Windows Server 2003
     and Windows XP.

  ntdll!ZwReadFile:
  77f4302f mov      eax,0xbf
  77f43034 mov      edx,0x7ffe0300
  77f43039 call     edx
  77f4303b ret      0x24

   This function calls into SharedUserData!SystemCallStub (every sys-
tem call goes through this function). The following is a disassembly of the code
at 7ffe0300.

  SharedUserData!SystemCallStub:
  7ffe0300 mov      edx,esp
  7ffe0302 sysenter
  7ffe0304 ret

   If you’re wondering why this extra call is required (instead of just invoking
SYSENTER from within the system API), it’s because SYSENTER records no
state information whatsoever. In the previous implementation, the invocation
of int 2e would store the current value of the EIP and EFLAGS registers.
SYSENTER on the other hand stores no state information, so by calling into the
SystemCallStub the operating system is recording the address of the cur-
rent user-mode stub in the stack, so that it later knows where to return. Once
the kernel completes the call and needs to go back to user mode, it simply
jumps to the address recorded in the stack by that call from the API into
SystemCallStub; the RET instruction at 7ffe0304 is never actually executed.

Executable Formats
A basic understanding of executable formats is critical for reversers because a
program’s executable often gives significant hints about a program’s architec-
ture. I’d say that in general, a true hacker must understand the system’s exe-
cutable format in order to truly understand the system.
   This section will cover the basic structure of Windows’ executable file for-
mat: the Portable Executable (PE). To avoid turning this into a boring listing of
the individual fields, I will only discuss the general concepts of portable exe-
cutables and the interesting fields. For a full listing of the individual fields, you
can use the MSDN (at http://msdn.microsoft.com) to look up the spe-
cific data structures specified in the section titled “Headers.”

Basic Concepts
Probably the most important thing to bear in mind when dealing with exe-
cutable files is that they’re relocatable. This simply means that they could be

     loaded at a different virtual address each time they are loaded (but they can
     never be relocated after they have been loaded). Relocation happens because
     an executable does not exist in a vacuum—it must coexist with other executa-
     bles that are loaded in the same address space. Sure, modern operating sys-
     tems provide each process with its own address space, but there are many
     executables that are loaded into each address space. Other than the main exe-
     cutable (that’s the .exe file you launch when you run a program), every pro-
     gram has a certain number of additional executables loaded into its address
     space, regardless of whether it has DLLs of its own or not. The operating sys-
     tem loads quite a few DLLs into each program’s address space—it all depends
     on which OS features are required by the program.
        Because multiple executables are loaded into each address space, we effec-
     tively have a mix of executables in each address space that wasn’t necessarily
     preplanned. Therefore, it’s likely that two or more modules will try to use the
     same memory address, which is not going to work. The solution is to relocate one
     of these modules while it’s being loaded and simply load it in a different address
     than the one it was originally planned to be loaded at. At this point you may be
     wondering why an executable even needs to know in advance where it will be
     loaded? Can’t it be like any regular file and just be loaded wherever there’s
     room? The problem is that an executable contains many cross-references, where
     one position in the code is pointing at another position in the code. Consider,
     for example, the sequence that accesses a global variable.

       MOV    EAX, DWORD PTR [pGlobalVariable]

       The preceding instruction is a typical global variable access. The storage for
     such a global variable is stored inside the executable image (because many
     variables have a preinitialized value). The question is, what address should
     the compiler and linker write as the address to pGlobalVariable while gen-
     erating the executable? Usually, you would just write a relative address—an
     address that’s relative to the beginning of the file. This way you wouldn’t have
     to worry about where the file gets loaded. The problem is this is a code
     sequence that gets executed directly by the processor. You could theoretically
     generate logic that would calculate the exact address by adding the relative
     address to the base address where the executable is currently mapped, but that
     would incur a significant performance penalty. Instead, the loader just goes
     over the code and modifies all absolute addresses within it to make sure that
     they point to the right place.
       Instead of going through this process every time a module is loaded, each
     module is assigned a base address while it is being created. The linker then
     assumes that the executable is going to be loaded at the base address—if it
     does, no relocation will take place. If the module’s base address is already
     taken, the module is relocated.

  Relocations are important for several reasons. First of all, they’re the reason
why there are never absolute addresses in executable headers, only in code.
Whenever you have a pointer inside the executable header, it’ll always be in
the form of a relative virtual address (RVA). An RVA is just an offset into the file.
When the file is loaded and is assigned a virtual address, the loader calculates
real virtual addresses out of RVAs by adding the module’s base address
(where it was loaded) to an RVA.

Image Sections
An executable image is divided into individual sections in which the file’s con-
tents are stored. Sections are needed because different areas in the file are
treated differently by the memory manager when a module is loaded. A com-
mon division is to have a code section (also called a text section) containing the
executable’s code and a data section containing the executable’s data. In load
time, the memory manager sets the access rights on memory pages in the dif-
ferent sections based on their settings in the section header. This determines
whether a given section is readable, writable, or executable.
   The code section contains the executable’s code, and the data sections con-
tain the executable’s initialized data, which means that they contain the con-
tents of any initialized variable defined anywhere in the program. Consider
for example the following global variable definition:

  char szMessage[] = “Welcome to my program!”;

  Regardless of where such a line is placed within a C/C++ program (inside
or outside a function), the compiler will need to store the string somewhere in
the executable. This is considered initialized data. The string and the variable
that point to it (szMessage) will both be stored in an initialized data section.

Section Alignment
Because individual sections often have different access settings defined in the
executable header, and because the memory manager must apply these access
settings when an executable image is loaded, sections must typically be page-
aligned when an executable is loaded into memory. On the other hand, it
would be wasteful to actually align executables to a page boundary on disk—
that would make them significantly bigger than they need to be.
   Because of this, the PE header has two different kinds of alignment fields:
Section alignment and file alignment. Section alignment is how sections are
aligned when the executable is loaded in memory and file alignment is how
sections are aligned inside the file, on disk. Alignment is important when
accessing the file because it causes some interesting phenomena. The problem

     is that an RVA is relative to the beginning of the image when it is mapped as an
     executable (meaning that distances are calculated using section alignment).
     This means that if you just open an executable as a regular file and try to access
     it, you might run into problems where RVAs won’t point to the right place.
     This is because RVAs are computed using the file’s section alignment (which is
     effectively its in-memory alignment), and not using the file alignment.

     Dynamically Linked Libraries
     Dynamically linked libraries (DLLs) are a key feature in a Windows. The idea
     is that a program can be broken into more than one executable file, where each
     executable is responsible for one feature or area of program functionality. The
     benefit is that overall program memory consumption is reduced because exe-
     cutables are not loaded until the features they implement are required. Addi-
     tionally, individual components can be replaced or upgraded to modify or
     improve a certain aspect of the program. From the operating system’s stand-
     point, DLLs can dramatically reduce overall system memory consumption
     because the system can detect that a certain executable has been loaded into
     more than one address space and just map it into each address space instead of
     reloading it into a new memory location.
        It is important to differentiate DLLs from build-time static libraries (.lib
     files) that are permanently linked into an executable. With static libraries, the
     code in the .lib file is statically linked right into the executable while it is
     built, just as if the code in the .lib file was part of the original program source
     code. When the executable is loaded the operating system has no way of
     knowing that parts of it came from a library. If another executable gets loaded
     that is also statically linked to the same library, the library code will essentially
     be loaded into memory twice, because the operating system will have no idea
     that the two executables contain parts that are identical.
        Windows programs have two different methods of loading and attaching to
     DLLs in runtime. Static linking (not to be confused with compile-time static
     linking!) refers to a process where an executable contains a reference to
     another executable within its import table. This is the typical linking method
     that is employed by most application programs, because it is the most conve-
     nient to use. Static linking is implementing by having each module list the
     modules it uses and the functions it calls within each module (this is called the
     import table). When the loader loads such an executable, it also loads all mod-
     ules that are used by the current module and resolves all external references so
     that the executable holds valid pointers to all external functions it plans on
     calling.
        Runtime linking refers to a different process whereby an executable can
     decide to load another executable in runtime and call a function from that exe-
     cutable. The principal difference between these two methods is that with

dynamic linking the program must manually load the right module in runtime
and find the right function to call by searching through the target executable’s
headers. Runtime linking is more flexible, but is also more difficult to imple-
ment from the programmer’s perspective. From a reversing standpoint, static
linking is easier to deal with because it openly exposes which functions are
called from which modules.

Headers
A PE file starts with the good old DOS header. This is a common backward-
compatible design that ensures that attempts to execute PE files on DOS sys-
tems will fail gracefully. In this case failing gracefully means that you’ll just get
the well-known “This program cannot be run in DOS mode” message. It goes
without saying that no PE executable will actually run on DOS—this message
is as far as they’ll go. In order to implement this message, each PE executable
essentially contains a little 16-bit DOS program that displays it.
   The most important field in the DOS header (which is defined in the
IMAGE_DOS_HEADER structure) is the e_lfanew member, which points to the
real PE header. This is an extension to the DOS header—DOS never reads it.
The “new” header is essentially the real PE header, and is defined as follows.

  typedef struct _IMAGE_NT_HEADERS {
     DWORD Signature;
     IMAGE_FILE_HEADER FileHeader;
     IMAGE_OPTIONAL_HEADER32 OptionalHeader;
  } IMAGE_NT_HEADERS32, *PIMAGE_NT_HEADERS32;

  This data structure references two data structures which contain the actual
PE header. They are:

  typedef struct _IMAGE_FILE_HEADER {
     WORD    Machine;
     WORD    NumberOfSections;
     DWORD   TimeDateStamp;
     DWORD   PointerToSymbolTable;
     DWORD   NumberOfSymbols;
     WORD    SizeOfOptionalHeader;
     WORD    Characteristics;
  } IMAGE_FILE_HEADER, *PIMAGE_FILE_HEADER;

  typedef struct _IMAGE_OPTIONAL_HEADER {
     // Standard fields.
     WORD    Magic;
     BYTE    MajorLinkerVersion;
     BYTE    MinorLinkerVersion;
     DWORD   SizeOfCode;

          DWORD    SizeOfInitializedData;
          DWORD    SizeOfUninitializedData;
          DWORD    AddressOfEntryPoint;
          DWORD    BaseOfCode;
          DWORD    BaseOfData;

          // NT additional fields.
          DWORD   ImageBase;
          DWORD   SectionAlignment;
          DWORD   FileAlignment;
          WORD    MajorOperatingSystemVersion;
          WORD    MinorOperatingSystemVersion;
          WORD    MajorImageVersion;
          WORD    MinorImageVersion;
          WORD    MajorSubsystemVersion;
          WORD    MinorSubsystemVersion;
          DWORD   Win32VersionValue;
          DWORD   SizeOfImage;
          DWORD   SizeOfHeaders;
          DWORD   CheckSum;
          WORD    Subsystem;
          WORD    DllCharacteristics;
          DWORD   SizeOfStackReserve;
          DWORD   SizeOfStackCommit;
          DWORD   SizeOfHeapReserve;
          DWORD   SizeOfHeapCommit;
          DWORD   LoaderFlags;
          DWORD   NumberOfRvaAndSizes;
          IMAGE_DATA_DIRECTORY DataDirectory[IMAGE_NUMBEROF_DIRECTORY_ENTRIES];
       } IMAGE_OPTIONAL_HEADER32, *PIMAGE_OPTIONAL_HEADER32;

        All of these headers are defined in the Microsoft Platform SDK in the
     WinNT.H header file.
        Most of these fields are self explanatory, but several notes are in order. First
     of all, it goes without saying that all pointers within these headers (such as
     AddressOfEntryPoint or BaseOfCode) are RVAs and not actual pointers.
     Additionally, it should be noted that most of the interesting contents in a PE
     header actually resides in the DataDirectory, which is an array of addi-
     tional data structures that are stored inside the PE header. The beauty of this
     layout is that an executable doesn’t have to have every entry, only the ones it
     requires. For more information on the individual directories refer to the sec-
     tion on directories later in this chapter.

Imports and Exports
Imports and exports are the mechanisms that enable the dynamic linking
process of executables described earlier. Consider an executable that refer-
ences functions in other executables while it is being compiled and linked. The
compiler and linker have no idea of the actual addresses of the imported func-
tions. It is only in runtime that these addresses will be known. To solve this
problem, the linker creates a special import table that lists all the functions
imported by the current module by their names. The import table contains a
list of modules that the module uses and the list of functions called within each
of those modules.
   When the module is loaded, the loader loads every module listed in the
import table, and goes to find the address of each of the functions listed in each
module. The addresses are found by going over the exporting module’s export
table, which contains the names and RVAs of every exported function.
   When the importing module needs to call into an imported function, the
calling code typically looks like this:

  call    [SomeAddress]

   Where SomeAddress is a pointer into the executable import address table
(IAT). When the modue is linked the IAT is nothing but an list of empty values,
but when the module is loaded, the linker resolves each entry in the IAT to
point to the actual function in the exporting module. This way when the call-
ing code is executed, SomeAddress will point to the actual address of the
imported function. Figure 3.4 illustrates this process on three executables:
ImportingModule.EXE, SomeModule.DLL, and AnotherModule.DLL.

Directories
PE Executables contain a list of special optional directories, which are essen-
tially additional data structures that executables can contain. Most directories
have a special data structure that describes their contents, and none of them is
required for an executable to function properly.

                                                          SomeModule.DLL

                                                            Export Section

                                                    Function1
                                                    Function2

                ImportingModule.EXE
                                                            Code Section

                    Export Section
            Function1
                                                         AnotherModule.DLL
            Function2
            Function3

                                                            Export Section
                                                    Function1
                                                    Function2
                    Code Section                    Function3

                    Import Section
            SomeModule.DLL:
            Function1
            Function2                                       Code Section

            AnotherModule.DLL:
            Function4
            Function 9

Figure 3.4 The dynamic linking process and how modules can be interconnected using
      their import and export tables.

        Table 3.1 lists the common directories and provides a brief explanation on
      each one.

Table 3.1   The Optional Directories in the Portable Executable File Format.

                                                                   ASSOCIATED DATA
  NAME                          DESCRIPTION                        STRUCTURE

  Export Table                  Lists the names and RVAs of        IMAGE_EXPORT_
                                all exported functions in the      DIRECTORY
                                current module.

  Import Table                  Lists the names of module        IMAGE_IMPORT_
                                and functions that are           DESCRIPTOR
                                imported from the current
                                module. For each function, the
                                list contains a name string
                                (or an ordinal) and an RVA that
                                points to the current function’s
                                import address table entry.
                                This is the entry that receives
                                the actual pointer to the
                                imported function in runtime,
                                when the module is loaded.

  Resource Table                Points to the executable’s         IMAGE_RESOURCE_
                                resource directory. A resource     DIRECTORY
                                directory is a static definition
                                or various user-interface
                                elements such as strings,
                                dialog box layouts, and menus.

  Base Relocation Table         Contains a list of addresses       IMAGE_BASE_
                                within the module that must        RELOCATION
                                be recalculated in case the
                                module gets loaded in any
                                address other than the one it
                                was built for.

  Debugging Information         Contains debugging                IMAGE_DEBUG_
                                information for the executable. DIRECTORY
                                This is usually presented in
                                the form of a link to an external
                                symbol file that contains the
                                actual debugging information.

  Thread Local Storage Table    Points to a special thread-local   IMAGE_TLS_
                                section in the executable that     DIRECTORY
                                can contain thread-local
                                variables. This functionality is
                                managed by the loader when
                                the executable is loaded.

                                                                                (continued)

Table 3.1   (continued)

                                                                         ASSOCIATED DATA
        NAME                         DESCRIPTION                         STRUCTURE

        Load Configuration Table     Contains a variety of image         IMAGE_LOAD_
                                     configuration elements, such        CONFIG_
                                     as a special LOCK prefix table      DIRECTORY
                                     (which can modify an image
                                     in load time to accommodate
                                     for uniprocessor or
                                     multiprocessor systems). This
                                     table also contains information
                                     for a special security feature
                                     that lists the legitimate
                                     exception handlers in the
                                     module (to prevent malicious
                                     code from installing an illegal
                                     exception handler).

        Bound Import Table           Contains an additional              IMAGE_BOUND_
                                     import-related table that           IMPORT_
                                     contains information on             DESCRIPTOR
                                     bound import entries. A
                                     bound import means that the
                                     importing executable contains
                                     actual addresses into the
                                     exporting module. This
                                     directory is used for confirming
                                     that such addresses are
                                     still valid.

        Import Address Table (IAT)   Contains a list of entries for      A list of 32-bit
                                     each function imported from         pointers
                                     the current module. These
                                     entries are initialized in load
                                     time to the actual addresses
                                     of the imported functions.

        Delay Import Descriptor      Contains special information        ImgDelayDescr
                                     that can be used for
                                     implementing a delayed-load
                                     importing mechanism whereby
                                     an imported function is only
                                     resolved when it is first called.
                                     This mechanism is not
                                     supported by the operating
                                     system and is implemented
                                     by the C runtime library.

Input and Output
I/O can be relevant to reversing because tracing a program’s communications
with the outside world is much easier than doing code-level reversing, and can
at times be almost as informative. In fact, some reversing sessions never reach
the code-level reversing phase—by simply monitoring a program’s I/O we
can often answer every question we have regarding our target program.
   The following sections provide a brief introduction to the various I/O chan-
nels implemented in Windows. These channels can be roughly divided into
two layers: the low-level layer is the I/O system which is responsible for com-
municating with the hardware, and so on. The higher-level layer is the Win32
subsystem, which is responsible for implementing the GUI and for processing
user input.

The I/O System
The I/O system is a combination of kernel components that manage the device
drivers running in the system and the communication between applications
and device drivers. Device drivers register with the I/O system, which enables
applications to communicate with them and make generic or device-specific
requests from the device. Generic requests include basic tasks such having a
file system read or writing to a file. The I/O system is responsible for relaying
such request from the application to the device driver responsible for per-
forming the operation.
   The I/O system is layered, which means that for each device there can be
multiple device drivers that are stacked on top of each other. This enables the
creation of a generic file system driver that doesn’t care about the specific stor-
age device that is used. In the same way it is possible to create generic storage
drivers that don’t care about the specific file system driver that will be used to
manage the data on the device. The I/O system will take care of connecting the
two components together, and because they use well-defined I/O System
interfaces, they will be able to coexist without special modifications.
   This layered architecture also makes it relatively easy to add filter drivers,
which are additional layers that monitor or modify the communications
between drivers and the applications or between two drivers. Thus it is possi-
ble to create generic data processing drivers that perform some kind of pro-
cessing on every file before it is sent to the file system (think of a transparent
file-compression or file-encryption driver).
   The I/O system is interesting to us as reversers because we often monitor it
to extract information regarding our target program. This is usually done by
tools that insert special filtering code into the device hierarchy and start mon-
itoring the flow of data. The device being monitored can represent any kind of

      I/O element such as a network interface, a high-level networking protocol, a
      file system, or a physical storage device.
         Of course, the position in which a filter resides on the I/O stack makes a very
      big difference, because it affects the type of data that the filtering component is
      going to receive. For example, if a filtering component resides above a high-
      level networking protocol component (such as TCP for example), it will see the
      high-level packets being sent and received by applications, without the vari-
      ous low-level TCP, IP, or Ethernet packet headers. On the other hand, if that fil-
      ter resides at the network interface level, it will receive low-level networking
      protocol headers such as TCP, IP, and so on.
         The same concept applies to any kind of I/O channel, and the choice of
      where to place a filter driver really depends on what information we’re look-
      ing to extract. In most cases, we will not be directly making these choices for
      ourselves—we’ll simply need to choose the right tool that monitors things at
      the level that’s right for our needs.

      The Win32 Subsystem
      The Win32 subsystem is the component responsible for every aspect of the
      Windows user interface. This starts with the low-level graphics engine, the
      graphics device interface (GDI), and ends with the USER component, which is
      responsible for higher-level GUI constructs such as windows and menus, and
      for processing user input.
         The inner workings of the Win32 subsystem is probably the least-docu-
      mented area in Windows, yet I think it’s important to have a general under-
      standing of how it works because it is the gateway to all user-interface in
      Windows. First of all, it’s important to realize that the components considered
      the Win32 subsystem are not responsible for the entire Win32 API, only for the
      USER and GDI portions of it. As described earlier, the BASE API exported from
      KERNEL32.DLL is implemented using direct calls into the native API, and has
      really nothing to do with the Win32 subsystem.
         The Win32 subsystem is implemented inside the WIN32K.SYS kernel com-
      ponent and is controlled by the USER32.DLL and GDI32.DLL user compo-
      nents. Communications between the user-mode DLLs and the kernel
      component is performed using conventional system calls (the same mecha-
      nism used throughout the system for calling into the kernel).
         It can be helpful for reversers to become familiar with USER and GDI and
      with the general architecture of the Win32 subsystem because practically all
      user-interaction flows through them. Suppose, for example, that you’re trying
      to find the code in a program that displays a certain window, or the code that
      processes a certain user event. The key is to know how to track the flow of such
      events inside the Win32 subsystem. From there it becomes easy to find the pro-
      gram code that’s responsible for receiving or generating such events.

Object Management
Because USER and GDI are both old components that were ported from
ancient versions of Windows, they don’t use the kernel object manager dis-
cussed earlier. Instead they each use their own little object manager mecha-
nism. Both USER and GDI maintain object tables that are quite similar in
layout. Handles to Win32 objects such as windows and device contexts are
essentially indexes into these object tables. The tables are stored and managed
in kernel memory, but are also mapped into each process’s address space for
read-only access from user mode.
   Because the USER and GDI handle tables are global, and because handles
are just indexes into those tables, it is obvious that unlike kernel object han-
dles, both USER and GDI handles are global—if more than one process needs
to access the same objects, they all share the same handles. In reality, the Win32
subsystem doesn’t always allow more than one process to access the same
objects; the specific behavior object type.

Structured Exception Handling
An exception is a special condition in a program that makes it immediately
jump to a special function called an exception handler. The exception handler
then decides how to deal with the exception and can either correct the problem
and make the program continue from the same code position or resume exe-
cution from another position. An exception handler can also decide to termi-
nate the program if the exception cannot be resolved.
   There are two basic types of exceptions: hardware exceptions and software
exceptions. Hardware exceptions are exceptions generated by the processor, for
example when a program accesses an invalid memory page (a page fault) or
when a division by zero occurs. A software exception is generated when a pro-
gram explicitly generates an exception in order to report an error. In C++ for
example, an exception can be raised using the throw keyword, which is a
commonly used technique for propagating error conditions (as an alternative
to returning error codes in function return values). In Windows, the throw
keyword is implemented using the RaiseException Win32 API, which goes
down into the kernel and follows a similar code path as a hardware exception,
eventually returning to user mode to notify the program of the exception.
   Structured exception handling means that the operating system provides
mechanisms for “distributing” exceptions to applications in an organized
manner. Each thread is assigned an exception-handler list, which is a list of rou-
tines that can deal with exceptions when they occur. When an exception
occurs, the operating system calls each of the registered handlers and the han-
dlers can decide whether they would like to handle the exception or whether
the system should keep on looking.

         The exception handler list is stored in the thread information block (TIB) data
      structure, which is available from user mode and contains the following fields:

        _NT_TIB:
           +0x000 ExceptionList    : 0x0012fecc
           +0x004 StackBase        : 0x00130000
           +0x008 StackLimit       : 0x0012e000
           +0x00c SubSystemTib     : (null)
           +0x010 FiberData        : 0x00001e00
           +0x010 Version          : 0x1e00
           +0x014 ArbitraryUserPointer : (null)
           +0x018 Self             : 0x7ffde000

         The TIB is stored in a regular private-allocation user-mode memory. We
      already know that a single process can have multiple threads, but all threads
      see the same memory; they all share the same address space. This means that
      each process can have multiple TIB data structures. How does a thread find its
      own TIB in runtime? On IA-32 processors, Windows uses the FS segment reg-
      ister as a pointer to the currently active thread-specific data structures. The
      current thread’s TIB is always available at FS:[0].
         The ExceptionList member is the one of interest; it is the head of the cur-
      rent thread’s exception handler list. When an exception is generated, the proces-
      sor calls the registered handler from the IDT. Let’s take a page-fault exception as
      an example. When an invalid memory address is accessed (an invalid memory
      address is one that doesn’t have a valid page-table entry), the processor gener-
      ates a page-fault interrupt (interrupt #14), and invokes the interrupt handler
      from entry 14 at the IDT. In Windows, this entry usually points to the KiTrap0E
      function in the Windows kernel. KiTrap0E decides which type of page fault has
      occurred and dispatches it properly. For user-mode page faults that aren’t
      resolved by the memory manager (such as faults caused by an application
      accessing an invalid memory address), Windows calls into a user-mode excep-
      tion dispatcher routine called KiUserExceptionDispatcher in NTDLL.DLL.
      KiUserExceptionDispatcher calls into RtlDispatchException, which
      is responsible for going through the linked list at ExceptionList and looking
      for an exception handler that can deal with the exception. The linked list is
      essentially a chain of _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION_RECORD data structures,
      which are defined as follows:

        _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION_RECORD:
           +0x000 Next             : Ptr32 _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION_RECORD
           +0x004 Handler          : Ptr32

  A bare-bones exception handler set up sequence looks something like this:

  00411F8A   push         ExceptionHandler
  00411F8F   mov          eax,dword ptr fs:[00000000h]
  00411F95   push         eax
  00411F96   mov          dword ptr fs:[0],esp

   This sequence simply adds an _EXCEPTION_REGISTRATION_RECORD
entry into the current thread’s exception handler list. The items are stored on
the stack.
   In real-life you will rarely run into simple exception handler setup
sequences such as the one just shown. That’s because compilers typically aug-
ment the operating system’s mechanism in order to provide support for nested
exception-handling blocks and for multiple blocks within the same function.
In the Microsoft compilers, this is done by routing exception to the
_except_handler3 exception handler, which then calls the correct excep-
tion filter and exception handler based on the current function’s layout. To
implement this functionality, the compiler manages additional data structures
that manage the hierarchy of exception handlers within a single function. The
following is a typical Microsoft C/C++ compiler SEH installation sequence:

  00411F83   push         0FFFFFFFFh
  00411F85   push         425090h
  00411F8A   push         offset @ILT+420(__except_handler3) (4111A9h)
  00411F8F   mov          eax,dword ptr fs:[00000000h]
  00411F95   push         eax
  00411F96   mov          dword ptr fs:[0],esp

  As you can see, the compiler has extended the _EXCEPTION_REGISTRA-
TION_RECORD data structure and has added two new members. These mem-
bers will be used by _except_handler3 to determine which handler should
be called.
  Beyond the frame-based exception handlers, recent versions of the operating
system also support a vector of exception handlers, which is a linear list of han-
dlers that are called for every exception, regardless which code generated it.
Vectored exception handlers are installed using the Win32 API AddVectored
ExceptionHandler.

Conclusion
This concludes our (extremely brief) journey through the architecture and
internals of the Windows operating system. This chapter provides the very
basics that every reverser must know about the operating system he or she is
using.

         The bottom line is that knowledge of operating systems can be useful to
      reversers at many different levels. First of all, understanding the system’s exe-
      cutable file format is crucial, because executable headers often pack quite a few
      hints regarding programs and their architectures. Additionally, having a basic
      understanding of how the system communicates with the outside world is
      helpful for effectively observing and monitoring applications using the vari-
      ous system monitoring tools. Finally, understanding the basic APIs offered by
      the operating system can be helpful in deciphering programs. Imagine an
      application making a sequence of system API calls. The application is essen-
      tially talking to the operating system, and the API is the language; if you
      understand the basics of the API in question, you can tune in to that conversa-
      tion and find out what the application is saying. . . .

        FURTHER READING

        If you’d like to proceed to develop a better understanding of operating systems,
        check out Operating System, Design and Implementation by Andrew S.
        Tanenbaum and Albert S. Woodhull [Tanenbaum2] Andrew S. Tanenbaum,
        Albert S. Woodhull, Operating Systems: Design and Implementation, Second
        Edition, Prentice Hall, 1997 for a generic study of operating systems concepts.
        For highly detailed information on the architecture of NT-based Windows
        operating systems, see Microsoft Windows Internals, Fourth Edition: Microsoft
        Windows Server 2003, Windows XP, and Windows 2000 by Mark E. Russinovich
        and David A. Solomon [Russinovich]. That book is undoubtedly the authoritative
        guide on the Windows architecture and internals.
                                                                CHAPTER

                                                                     4

                                          Reversing Tools

Reversing is impossible without the right tools. There are hundreds of differ-
ent software tools available out there that can be used for reversing, some free-
ware and others costing thousands of dollars. Understanding the differences
between these tools and choosing the right ones is critical.
   There are no all-in-one reversing tools available (at least not at the time of
writing). This means that you need to create your own little toolkit that will
include every type of tool that you might possibly need. This chapter describes
the different types of tools that are available and makes recommendations for
the best products in each category. Some of these products are provided free-
of-charge by their developers, while others are quite expensive.
   We will be looking at a variety of different types of tools, starting with basic
reversing tools such as disassemblers and low-level debuggers, and proceed-
ing to decompilers and a variety of system-monitoring tools. Finally, we will
discuss some executable patching and dumping tools that can often be helpful
in the reversing process.
   It is up to you to decide whether your reversing projects justify spending
several hundreds of U.S. dollars on software. Generally, I’d say that it’s possi-
ble to start reversing without spending a dime on software, but some of these
commercial products will certainly make your life easier.

      Different Reversing Approaches
      There are many different approaches for reversing and choosing the right one
      depends on the target program, the platform on which it runs and on which it
      was developed, and what kind of information you’re looking to extract. Gen-
      erally speaking, there are two fundamental reversing methodologies: offline
      analysis and live analysis.

      Offline Code Analysis (Dead-Listing)
      Offline analysis of code means that you take a binary executable and use a dis-
      assembler or a decompiler to convert it into a human-readable form. Reversing
      is then performed by manually reading and analyzing parts of that output.
      Offline code analysis is a powerful approach because it provides a good out-
      line of the program and makes it easy to search for specific functions that are
      of interest.
         The downside of offline code analysis is usually that a better understanding
      of the code is required (compared to live analysis) because you can’t see the
      data that the program deals with and how it flows. You must guess what type
      of data the code deals with and how it flows based on the code. Offline analy-
      sis is typically a more advanced approach to reversing.
         There are some cases (particularly cracking-related) where offline code
      analysis is not possible. This typically happens when programs are “packed,”
      so that the code is encrypted or compressed and is only unpacked in runtime.
      In such cases only live code analysis is possible.

      Live Code Analysis
      Live Analysis involves the same conversion of code into a human-readable
      form, but here you don’t just statically read the converted code but instead run
      it in a debugger and observe its behavior on a live system. This provides far
      more information because you can observe the program’s internal data and
      how it affects the flow of the code. You can see what individual variables con-
      tain and what happens when the program reads or modifies that data. Gener-
      ally, I’d say that live analysis is the better approach for beginners because it
      provides a lot more data to work with. For tools that can be used for live code
      analysis, please refer to the section on debuggers, later in this chapter.

      Disassemblers
      The disassembler is one of the most important reversing tools. Basically, a dis-
      assembler decodes binary machine code (which is just a stream of numbers)

into a readable assembly language text. This process is somewhat similar to
what takes place within a CPU while a program is running. The difference is
that instead of actually performing the tasks specified by the code (as is done
by a processor), the disassembler merely decodes each instruction and creates
a textual representation for it.
   Needless to say, the specific instruction encoding format and the resulting
textual representation are entirely platform-specific. Each platform supports a
different instruction set and has a different set of registers. Therefore a disas-
sembler is also platform-specific (though there are disassemblers that contain
specific support for more than one platform).
   Figure 4.1 demonstrates how a disassembler converts a sequence of IA-32
opcode bytes into human-readable assembly language. The process typically
starts with the disassembler looking up the opcode in a translation table that
contains the textual name of each instructions (in this case the opcode is 8B
and the instruction is MOV) along with their formats. IA-32 instructions are like
functions, meaning that each instruction takes a different set of “parameters”
(usually called operands). The disassembler then proceeds to analyze exactly
which operands are used in this particular instruction.

  DISTINGUISHING CODE FROM DATA

  It might not sound like a serious problem, but it is often a significant challenge
  to teach a disassembler to distinguish code from data. Executable images
  typically have .text sections that are dedicated to code, but it turns out that
  for performance reasons, compilers often insert certain chunks of data into the
  code section. In order to properly distinguish code from data, disassemblers
  must use recursive traversal instead of the conventional linear sweep
  Benjamin Schwarz, Saumya Debray, and Gregory Andrews. Disassembly of
  Executable Code Revisited. Proceedings of the Ninth Working Conference on
  Reverse Engineering, 2002. [Schwarz]. Briefly, the difference between the two is
  that recursive traversal actually follows the flow of the code, so that an address
  is disassembled only if it is reachable from the code disassembled earlier. A
  linear sweep simply goes instruction by instruction, which means that any data
  in the middle of the code could potentially confuse the disassembler.
     The most common example of such data is the jump table sometimes used
  by compilers for implementing switch blocks. When a disassembler reaches
  such an instruction, it must employ some heuristics and loop through the jump
  table in order to determine which instruction to disassemble next. One
  problematic aspect of dealing with these tables is that it’s difficult to determine
  their exact length. Significant research has been done on algorithms for
  accurately distinguishing code from data in disassemblers, including
  [Cifuentes1] and [Schwarz].

                                Instruction   MOD/RM
                                                     Displacement
                                  Opcode       Byte

                                    8B          79            04

        MOV Opcode                          MOD/RM Byte:
         Defined as:        Specifies a register and memory-address pair.
                                                                                       Displacement Byte
        MOV Register,
       Register/Memory
                            MOD (2 bits)       REG (3 bits)        R/M (3 bits)

                                                                                    Specifies a
                                                     Specifies a                  register for the
                Describes the                         register                     address side
                format of the
                address side

                  MOV              EDI,        DWORD PTR             ECX          +4

Figure 4.1 Translating an IA-32 instruction from machine code into human-readable
      assembly language.

      IDA Pro
      IDA (Interactive Disassembler) by DataRescue (www.datarescue.com) is an
      extremely powerful disassembler that supports a variety of processor architec-
      tures, including IA-32, IA-64 (Itanium), AMD64, and many others. IDA also
      supports a variety of executable file formats, such as PE (Portable Executable,
      used in Windows), ELF (Executable and Linking Format, used in Linux), and
      even XBE, which is used on Microsoft’s Xbox. IDA is not cheap at $399 for the

Standard edition (the Advanced edition is currently $795 and includes support
for a larger number of processor architectures), but it’s definitely worth it if
you’re going to be doing a significant amount of reversing on large programs.
At the time of writing, DataRescue was offering a free time-limited trial ver-
sion of IDA. If you’re serious about reversing, I’d highly recommend that you
give IDA a try—it is one of the best tools available. Figure 4.2 shows a typical
IDA Pro screen.
   Feature wise, here’s the ground rule: Any feature you can think of that is pos-
sible to implement is probably already implemented in IDA. IDA is a remark-
ably flexible product, providing highly detailed disassembly, along with a
plethora of side features that assist you with your reversing tasks.
   IDA is capable of producing powerful flowcharts for a given function. These
are essentially logical graphs that show chunks of disassembled code and pro-
vide a visual representation of how each conditional jump in the code affects
the function’s flow. Each box represents a code snippet or a stage in the func-
tion’s flow. The boxes are connected by arrows that show the flow of the code
based on whether the conditional jump is satisfied or not. Figure 4.3 shows an
IDA-generated function flowchart.

Figure 4.2 A typical IDA Pro screen, showing code disassembly, a function list, and a string
list.

Figure 4.3 An IDA-generated function flowchart.

         IDA can produce interfunction charts that show you which functions call
      into a certain API or internal function. Figure 4.4 shows a call graph that visu-
      ally illustrates the flow of code within a part of the loaded program (the com-
      plete graph was just too large to fit into the page). The graph shows internal
      subroutines and illustrates the links between every one of those subroutines.
      The arrows coming out of each subroutine represents function calls made from
      that subroutine. Arrows that point to a subroutine show you who in the pro-
      gram calls that subroutine. The graph also illustrates the use of external APIs
      in the same manner—some of the boxes are lighter colored and have API
      names on them, and you can use the connecting arrows to determine who in
      the program is calling those APIs. You even get a brief textual description of
      some of the APIs!
         IDA also has a variety of little features that make it very convenient to use,
      such as the highlighting of all instances of the currently selected operand. For
      example, if you click the word EAX in an instruction, all references to EAX in
      the current page of disassembled code will be highlighted. This makes it much
      easier to read disassembled listings and gain an understanding of how data
      flows within the code.

Figure 4.4 An IDA-generated intrafunction flowchart that shows how a program’s internal
subroutines are connected to one another and which APIs are called by which subroutine.

ILDasm
ILDasm is a disassembler for the Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL),
which is the low-level assembly language—like language used in .NET pro-
grams. It is listed here because this book also discusses .NET reversing, and
ILDasm is a fundamental tool for .NET reversing.
  Figure 4.5 shows a common ILDasm view. On the left is ILDasm’s view of
the current program’s classes and their internal members. On the right is a dis-
assembled listing for one of the functions. Of course the assembly language is
different from the IA-32 assembly language that’s been described so far—it is
MSIL. This language will be described in detail in Chapter 12. One thing to
notice is the rather cryptic function and class names shown by ILDasm. That’s
because the program being disassembled has been obfuscated by PreEmptive
Solutions’ DotFuscator.

Figure 4.5 A screenshot of ILDasm, Microsoft’s .NET IL disassembler.

      Debuggers
      Debuggers exist primarily to assist software developers with locating and cor-
      recting errors in their programs, but they can also be used as powerful revers-
      ing tools. Most native code debuggers have some kind of support for stepping
      through assembly language code when no source code is available. Debuggers
      that support this mode of operation make excellent reversing tools, and there
      are several debuggers that were designed from the ground up with assembly
      language–level debugging in mind.
        The idea is that the debugger provides a disassembled view of the currently
      running function and allows the user to step through the disassembled code
      and see what the program does at every line. While the code is being stepped
      through, the debugger usually shows the state of the CPU’s registers and a
      memory dump, usually showing the currently active stack area. The following
      are the key debugger features that are required for reversers.

  Powerful Disassembler A powerful disassembler is a mandatory feature
    in a good reversing debugger, for obvious reasons. Being able to view
    the code clearly, with cross-references that reveal which branch goes
    where and where a certain instruction is called from, is critical. It’s also
    important to be able to manually control the data/code recognition
    heuristics, in case they incorrectly identify code as data or vice versa (for
    code/data ambiguities in disassemblers refer to the section on disassem-
    blers in this chapter).
  Software and Hardware Breakpoints Breakpoints are a basic debugging
    feature, and no debugger can exist without them, but it’s important to be
    able to install both software and hardware breakpoints. Software break-
    points are instructions added into the program’s code by the debugger
    at runtime. These instructions make the processor pause program execu-
    tion and transfer control to the debugger when they are reached during
    execution. Hardware breakpoints are a special CPU feature that allow
    the processor to pause execution when a certain memory address is
    accessed, and transfer control to the debugger. This is an especially pow-
    erful feature for reversers because it can greatly simplify the process of
    mapping and deciphering data structures in a program. All a reverser
    must do is locate a data structure of interest and place hardware break-
    points on specific areas of interest in that data structure. The hardware
    breakpoints can be used to expose the relevant code areas in the program
    that are responsible for manipulating the data structure in question.
  View of Registers and Memory A good reversing debugger must pro-
    vide a good visualization of the important CPU registers and of system
    memory. It is also helpful to have a constantly updated view of the stack
    that includes both the debugger’s interpretation of what’s in it and a raw
    view of its contents.
  Process Information It is very helpful to have detailed process informa-
    tion while debugging. There is an endless list of features that could fall
    into this category, but the most basic ones are a list of the currently loaded
    executable modules and the currently running threads, along with a
    stack dump and register dump for each thread.
  Debuggers that contain powerful disassemblers are not common, but the
ones that do are usually the best reversing tools you’ll find because they pro-
vide the best of both worlds. You get both a highly readable and detailed rep-
resentation of the code, and you can conveniently step through it and see what
the code does at every step, what kind of data it receives as input, and what
kind of data it produces as output.
  In modern operating systems debuggers can be roughly divided into two
very different flavors: user-mode debuggers and kernel-mode debuggers. User-mode

      debuggers are the more conventional debuggers that are typically used by soft-
      ware developers. As the name implies, user-mode debuggers run as normal
      applications, in user mode, and they can only be used for debugging regular
      user-mode applications. Kernel-mode debuggers are far more powerful. They
      allow unlimited control of the target system and provide a full view of every-
      thing happening on the system, regardless of whether it is happening inside
      application code or inside operating system code.
         The following sections describe the pros and cons of user-mode and kernel-
      mode debuggers and provide an overview on the most popular tools in each
      category.

      User-Mode Debuggers
      If you’ve ever used a debugger, it was most likely a user-mode debugger. User-
      mode debuggers are conventional applications that attach to another process
      (the debugee) and can take full control of it. User-mode debuggers have the
      advantage of being very easy to set up and use, because they are just another
      program that’s running on the system (unlike kernel-mode debuggers).
         The downside is that user-mode debuggers can only view a single process
      and can only view user mode code within that process. Being limited to a sin-
      gle process means that you have to know exactly which process you’d like to
      reverse. This may sound trivial, but sometimes it isn’t. For example, some-
      times you’ll run into programs that have several processes that are somehow
      interconnected. In such cases, you may not know which process actually runs
      the code you’re interested in.
         Being restricted to viewing user-mode code is not usually a problem unless
      the product you’re debugging has its own kernel-mode components (such as
      device drivers). When a program is implemented purely in user mode there’s
      usually no real need to step into operating system code that runs in the kernel.
         Beyond these limitations, some user-mode debuggers are also unable to
      debug a program before execution reaches the main executable’s entry point
      (this is typically the .exe file’s WinMain callback). This can be a problem in
      some cases because the system runs a significant amount of user-mode code
      before that, including calls to the DllMain callback of each DLL that is stati-
      cally linked to the executable.
         The following sections present some user-mode debuggers that are well
      suited for reversing.

      OllyDbg
      For reversers, OllyDbg, written by Oleh Yuschuk, is probably the best user-
      mode debugger out there (though the selection is admittedly quite small). The

beauty of Olly is that it appears to have been designed from the ground up as
a reversing tool, and as such it has a very powerful built-in disassembler. I’ve
seen quite a few beginners attempting their first steps in reversing with com-
plex tools such as Numega SoftICE. The fact is that unless you’re going to be
reversing kernel-mode code, or observing the system globally across multiple
processes, there’s usually no need for kernel-mode debugging—OllyDbg is
more than enough.
   OllyDbg’s greatest strength is in its disassembler, which provides powerful
code-analysis features. OllyDbg’s code analyzer can identify loops, switch
blocks, and other key code structures. It shows parameter names for all known
functions and APIs, and supports searching for cross-references between code
and data—in all possible directions. In fact, it would be fair to say that Olly has
the best disassembly capabilities of all debuggers I have worked with (except
for the IDA Pro debugger), including the big guns that run in kernel mode.
   Besides powerful disassembly features, OllyDbg supports a wide variety of
views, including listing imports and exports in modules, showing the list of
windows and other objects that are owned by the debugee, showing the cur-
rent chain of exception handlers, using import libraries (.lib files) for properly
naming functions that originated in such libraries, and others.
   OllyDbg also includes a built-in assembling and patching engine, which
makes it a cracker’s favorite. It is possible to type in assembly language code
over any area in a program and then commit the changes back into the exe-
cutable if you so require. Alternatively, OllyDbg can also store the list of patches
performed on a specific program and apply some or all of those patches while
the program is being debugged—when they are required.
   Figure 4.6 shows a typical OllyDbg screen. Notice the list of NTDLL names
on the left—OllyDbg not only shows imports and exports but also internal
names (if symbols are available). The bottom-left view shows a list of currently
open handles in the process.
   OllyDbg is an excellent reversing tool, especially considering that it is free
software—it doesn’t cost a dime. For the latest version of OllyDbg go to
http://home.t-online.de/home/Ollydbg.

User Debugging in WinDbg
WinDbg is a free debugger provided by Microsoft as part of the Debugging
Tools for Windows package (available free of charge at www.microsoft.com/
whdc/devtools/debugging/default.mspx). While some of its features
can be controlled from the GUI, WinDbg uses a somewhat inconvenient com-
mand-line interface as its primary user interface. WinDbg’s disassembler is quite
limited, and has some annoying anomalies (such as the inability to scroll back-
ward in the disassembly window).

Figure 4.6 A typical OllyDbg screen

         Unsurprisingly, one place where WinDbg is unbeatable and far surpasses
      OllyDbg is in its integration with the operating system. WinDbg has powerful
      extensions that can provide a wealth of information on a variety of internal
      system data structures. This includes dumping currently active user-mode
      heaps, security tokens, the PEB (Process Environment Block) and the TEB
      (Thread Environment Block), the current state of the system loader (the com-
      ponent responsible for loading and initializing program executables), and so
      on. Beyond the extensions, WinDbg also supports stepping through the earli-
      est phases of process initialization, even before statically linked DLLs are ini-
      tialized. This is different from OllyDbg, where debugging starts at the primary
      executable’s WinMain (this is the .exe file launched by the user), after all stati-
      cally linked DLLs are initialized. Figure 4.7 shows a screenshot from WinDbg.
      Notice how the code being debugged is a part of the NTDLL loader code that
      initializes DLLs while the process is coming up—not every user-mode debug-
      ger can do that.

Figure 4.7 A screenshot of WinDbg while it is attached to a user-mode process.

   WinDbg has been improved dramatically in the past couple of years, and new
releases that include new features and bug fixes have been appearing regularly.
Still, for reversing applications that aren’t heavily integrated with the operating
systems, OllyDbg has significant advantages. Olly has a far better user interface,
has a better disassembler, and provides powerful code analysis capabilities that
really make reversing a lot easier. Costwise they are both provided free of
charge, so that’s not a factor, but unless you are specifically interested in debug-
ging DLL initialization code, or are in need of the special debugger extension
features that WinDbg offers, I’d recommend that you stick with OllyDbg.

IDA Pro
Besides it being a powerful disassembler, IDA Pro is also a capable user-mode
debugger, which successfully combines IDA’s powerful disassembler with
solid debugging capabilities. I personally wouldn’t purchase IDA just for its
debugging capabilities, but having a debugger and a highly capable disassem-
bler in one program definitely makes IDA the Swiss Army Knife of the reverse
engineering community.

      PEBrowse Professional Interactive
      PEBrowse Professional Interactive is an enhanced version of the PEBrowse Pro-
      fessional PE Dumping software (discussed in the “Executable Dumping Tools”
      section later in this chapter) that also includes a decent debugger. PEBrowse
      offers multiple informative views on the process such as a detailed view of the
      currently active memory heaps and the allocated blocks within them.
         Beyond its native code disassembly and debugging capabilities, PEBrowse
      is also a decent intermediate language (IL) debugger and disassembler for
      .NET programs. PEBrowse Professional Interactive is available for download
      free of charge at www.smidgeonsoft.com.

      Kernel-Mode Debuggers
      Kernel-mode debugging is what you use when you need to get a view of the
      system as a whole and not on a specific process. Unlike a user-mode debugger,
      a kernel-mode debugger is not a program that runs on top of the operating
      system, but is a component that sits alongside the system’s kernel and allows
      for stopping and observing the entire system at any given moment. Kernel-
      mode debuggers typically also allow user-mode debugging, but this can some-
      times be a bit problematic because the debugger must be aware of the
      changing memory address space between the running processes.
         Kernel-mode debuggers are usually aimed at kernel-level developers such
      as device driver developers and developers of various operating system exten-
      sions, but they can be useful for other purposes as well. For reversers, kernel-
      mode debuggers are often incredibly helpful because they provide a full view
      of the system and of all running processes. In fact, many reversers use kernel
      debuggers exclusively, regardless of whether they are reversing kernel-mode
      or user-mode code. Of course, a kernel-mode debugger is mandatory when it
      is kernel-mode code that is being reversed.
         One powerful application of kernel-mode debuggers is the ability to place
      low-level breakpoints. When you’re trying to determine where in a program a
      certain operation is performed, a common approach is to set a breakpoint on
      an operating system API that would typically be called in order to perform
      that operation. For instance, when a program moves a window and you’d like
      to locate the program code responsible for moving it, you could place a break-
      point on the system API that moves windows. The problem is that there are
      quite a few APIs that could be used for moving windows, and you might not
      even know exactly which process is responsible for moving the window. Ker-
      nel debuggers offer an excellent solution: set a breakpoint on the low-level
      code in the operating system that is responsible for moving windows around.
      Whichever API is used by the program to move the window, it is bound to end
      up in that low-level operating system code.

   Unfortunately, kernel-mode debuggers are often difficult to set up and usu-
ally require a dedicated system, because they destabilize the operating system
to which they are attached. Also, because kernel debuggers suspend the entire
system and not just a single process, the system is always frozen while they are
open, and no threads are running. Because of these limitations I would recom-
mend that you not install a kernel-mode debugger unless you’ve specifically
confirmed that none of the available user-mode debuggers fit your needs. For
typical user-mode reversing scenarios, a kernel-mode debugger is really an
overkill.

Kernel Debugging in WinDbg
WinDbg is primarily a kernel-mode debugger. The way this works is that the
same program used for user-mode debugging also has a kernel-debugging
mode. Unlike the user-mode debugging functionality, WinDbg’s kernel-mode
debugging is performed remotely, on a separate system from the one running
the WinDbg GUI. The target system is booted with the /DEBUG switch (set in the
boot.ini configuration file) which enables a special debugging code inside
the Windows kernel. The debugee and the controlling system that runs
WinDbg are connected using either a serial null-modem cable, or a high-speed
FireWire (IEEE 1394) connection.
   The same kernel-mode debugging facilities that WinDbg offers are also acces-
sible through KD, a console mode program that connects to the debugee in the
exact same way. KD provides identical functionality to WinDbg, minus the GUI.
   Functionally, WinDbg is quite flexible. It has good support for retrieving
symbolic information from symbol files (including retrieving symbols from a
centralized symbol server on demand), and as in the user-mode debugger, the
debugger extensions make it quite powerful. The user interface is very limited,
and for the most part it is still essentially a command-line tool (because so
many features are only accessible using the command line), but for most appli-
cations it is reasonably convenient to use.
    WinDbg is quite limited when it comes to user-mode debugging—placing
user-mode breakpoints almost always causes problems. The severity of this
problem depends on which version of the operating system is being debugged.
Older operating systems such as Windows NT 4.0 were much worse than newer
ones such as Windows Server 2003 in this regard.
   One disadvantage of using a null-modem cable for debugging is perfor-
mance. The maximum supported speed is 115,200 bits per second, which is
really not that fast, so when significant amounts of information must be trans-
ferred between the host and the target, it can create noticeable delays. The
solution is to either use a FireWire cable (only supported on Windows XP and

      later), or to run the debugee on a virtual machine (discussed below in the
      “Kernel Debugging on Virtual Machines” section).
         As I’ve already mentioned with regards to the user-mode debugging features
      of WinDbg, it is provided by Microsoft free of charge, and can be downloaded at
      www.microsoft.com/whdc/devtools/debugging/default.mspx.
         Figure 4.8 shows what WinDbg looks like when it is used for kernel-mode
      debugging. Notice that the disassembly window on the right is disassembling
      kernel-mode code from the nt module (this is ntoskrnl.exe, the Windows
      kernel).

      Numega SoftICE
      All things being equal, SoftICE is probably the most popular reversing debug-
      ger out there. Originally, SoftICE was developed as a device-driver develop-
      ment tool for Windows, but it is used by quite a few reversers. The unique
      quality of SoftICE that really sets it apart from WinDbg is that it allows for
      local kernel-debugging. You can theoretically have just one system and still
      perform kernel-debugging, but I wouldn’t recommend it.

Figure 4.8 A screenshot from WinDbg when it is attached to a system for performing
      kernel-mode debugging.

   SoftICE is used by hitting a hotkey on the debugee (the hotkey can be hit at
anytime, regardless of what the debugee is doing), which freezes the sys-
tem and opens the SoftICE screen. Once inside the SoftICE screen, users can
see whatever the system was doing when the hotkey was hit, step through ker-
nel-mode (or user-mode) code, or set breakpoints on any code in the system.
SoftICE supports the loading of symbol files through a dedicated Symbol
Loader program (symbols can be loaded from a local file or from a symbol
server).
   SoftICE offers dozens of system information commands that dump a variety
of system data structures such as processes and threads, virtual memory infor-
mation, handles and objects, and plenty more. SoftICE is also compatible with
WinDbg extensions and can translate extensions DLLs and make their com-
mands available within the SoftICE environment.
   SoftICE is an interesting technology, and many people don’t really under-
stand how it works, so let’s run a brief overview. Fundamentally, SoftICE is a
Windows kernel-mode driver. When SoftICE is loaded, it hooks the system’s
keyboard driver, and essentially monitors keystrokes on the system. When
it detects that the SoftICE hotkey has been hit (the default is Ctrl+D), it manu-
ally freezes the system’s current state and takes control over it. It starts by
drawing a window over whatever is currently displayed on the screen. It is
important to realize that this window is not in any way connected to Win-
dows, because Windows is completely frozen at this point. SoftICE internally
manages this window and any other user-interface elements required while it
is running. When SoftICE is opened, it disables all interrupts, so that thread
scheduling is paused, and it takes control of all processors in multiprocessor
systems. This effectively freezes the system so that no code can run other than
SoftICE itself.
   It goes without saying that this approach of running the debugger locally on
the target system has certain disadvantages. Even though the Numega devel-
opers have invested significant effort into making SoftICE as transparent
as possible to the target system, it still sometimes affects it in ways that
WinDbg wouldn’t. First of all, the system is always slightly less stable when
SoftICE is running. In my years of using it, I’ve seen dozens of SoftICE related
blue screens. On the other hand, SoftICE is fast. Regardless of connection
speeds, WinDbg appears to always be somewhat sluggish; SoftICE on the
other hand always feels much more “immediate.” It instantly responds to user
input. Another significant advantage of SoftICE over WinDbg is in user-mode
debugging. SoftICE is much better at user-mode debugging than WinDbg, and
placing user-mode breakpoints in SoftICE is much more reliable than in
WinDbg.

        Other than stability issues, there are also functional disadvantages to the
      local debugging approach. The best example is the code that SoftICE uses for
      showing its window—any code that accesses the screen is difficult to step
      through in SoftICE because it tries to draw to the screen, while SoftICE is
      showing its debugging window.

        N OT E Many people wonder about SoftICE’s name, and it is actually quite
        interesting. ICE stands for in circuit emulator, which is a popular tool for
        performing extremely low-level debugging. The idea is to replace the system’s
        CPU with an emulator that acts just like the real CPU and is capable of running
        software, except that it can be debugged at the hardware level. This means that
        the processor can be stopped and that its state can be observed at any time.
        SoftICE stands for a Software ICE, which implies that SoftICE is like a software
        implementation of an in circuit emulator.

         Figure 4.9 shows what SoftICE looks like when it is opened. The original
      Windows screen stays in the background, and the SoftICE window is opened
      in the center of the screen. It is easy to notice that the SoftICE window has no
      border and is completely detached from the Windows windowing system.

Figure 4.9 NuMega SoftICE running on a Windows 2000 system.

Kernel Debugging on Virtual Machines
Because kernel debugging freezes and potentially destabilizes the operating sys-
tem on which it is performed, it is highly advisable to use a dedicated system for
kernel debugging, and to never use a kernel debugger on your primary com-
puter. This can be problematic for people who can’t afford extra PCs or for fre-
quent travelers who need to be able to perform kernel debugging on the road.
   The solution is to use a single computer with a virtual machine. Virtual
machines are programs that essentially emulate a full-blown PC’s hardware
through software. The guest system’s display is shown inside a window on the
host system, and the contents of its hard drives are stored in a file on the host’s
hard drive.
   Virtual machines are perfect for kernel debugging because they allow for
the creation of isolated systems that can be kernel debugged at any time, and
even concurrently (assuming the host has enough memory to support them),
without having any effect on the stability of the host.
   Virtual machines also offer a variety of additional features that make them
attractive for users requiring kernel debugging. Having the system’s hard drive
in a single file on the host really simplifies management and backups. For
instance, it is possible to store one state of the system and then make some con-
figuration changes—going back to the original configuration is just a matter of
copying the original file back, much easier than with a nonvirtual system.
Additionally, some virtual machine products support nonpersistent drives that
discard anything written to the hard drive when the system is shut down or
restarted. This feature is perfect for dealing with malicious software that might
try to corrupt the disk or infect additional files because any changes made
while the system is running are discarded when the system is shut down.
   Unsurprisingly, virtual machines require significant resources from the host.
The host must have enough memory to contain the host operating system, any
applications running on top of it, and the memory allocated for the guest sys-
tems currently running. The amount of memory allocated to each guest system
is typically user-configurable. Regarding the CPU, some virtual machines actu-
ally emulate the processor, which allows for emulating any system on any plat-
form, but that incurs a significant performance penalty. The more practical
application for virtual machines is to run guest operating systems that are com-
patible with the host’s processor, and to try to let the guest system run directly
on the host’s processor as much as possible. This appears to be the only way to
get decent performance out of the guest systems, but the problem is that the
guest can’t just be allowed to run on the host directly because that would inter-
fere with the host operating system. Instead, modern virtual machines allow
“checked” sequences of guest code to run directly on the host processor and
intervene whenever it’s necessary to ensure that the guest and host are properly
isolated from one another.

         Virtual machine technologies for PCs have really matured in recent years
      and can now offer a fast, stable solution for people who require more than one
      computer but that don’t need the processing power of multiple computers. The
      two primary virtual machine technologies currently available are Virtual PC
      from Microsoft Corporation and VMWare Workstation from VMWare Inc.
      Functionally the two products are very similar, both being able to run Win-
      dows and non-Windows operating systems. One difference is that VMWare
      also runs on non-Windows hosts such as Linux, allowing Linux systems to run
      versions of Windows (or other Linux installations) inside a virtual machine.
      Both products have full support for performing kernel-debugging using either
      WinDbg or NuMega SoftICE. Figure 4.10 shows a VMWare Workstation win-
      dow with a Windows Server 2003 system running inside it.

Figure 4.10 A screenshot of VMWare Workstation version 4.5 running a Windows Server
      2003 operating system on top of a Windows XP host.

Decompilers
Decompilers are a reverser’s dream tool—they attempt to produce a high-level
language source-code-like representation from a program binary. Of course, it
is never possible to restore the original code in its exact form because the com-
pilation process always removes some information from the program. The
amount of information that is retained in a program’s binary executable
depends on the high-level language, the low-level language to which the pro-
gram is being translated by the compiler, and on the specific compiler used.
For example, .NET programs written in one of the .NET-compatible program-
ming languages and compiled to MSIL can typically be decompiled with
decent results (assuming that no obfuscation is applied to the program). For
details on specific decompilers for the .NET platform, please see Chapter 12.
   For native IA-32 code, the situation is a bit more complicated. IA-32 binaries
contain far less high-level information, and recovering a decent high-level rep-
resentation from them is not currently possible. There are several native code
decompilers currently in development, though none of them has been able to
demonstrate accurate high-level output so far. Hopefully, this situation will
improve in the coming years. Chapter 13 discusses decompilers (with a focus
on native decompilation) and provides an insight into their architecture.

System-Monitoring Tools
System monitoring is an important part of the reversing process. In some cases
you can actually get your questions answered using system-monitoring tools
and without ever actually looking at code. System-monitoring tools is a general
category of tools that observe the various channels of I/O that exist between
applications and the operating system. These are tools such as file access moni-
tors that display every file operation (such as file creation, reading or writing to
a file, and so on) made from every application on the system. This is done by
hooking certain low-level components in the operating system and monitoring
any relevant calls made from applications.
   There are quite a few different kinds of system-monitoring tools, and endless
numbers of such tools available for Windows. My favorite tools are those offered
on the www.sysinternals.com Web site, written by Mark Russinovich (coau-
thor of the authoritative text on Windows internals [Russinovich]) and Bryce
Cogswell. This Web site offers quite a few free system-monitoring tools that
monitor a variety of aspects of the system and at several different levels. For

      example, they offer two tools for monitoring hard drive traffic: one at the file
      system level and another at the physical storage device level. Here is a brief
      overview of their most interesting tools.
        FileMon This tool monitors all file-system-level traffic between programs
          and the operating system, and can be used for viewing the file I/O
          generated by every process running on the system. With this tool we
          can see every file or directory that is opened, and every file read/write
          operation performed from any process in the system.
        TCPView This tool monitors all active TCP and UDP network connec-
          tions on every process. Notice that it doesn’t show the actual traffic, only
          a list of which connections are opened from which process, along with
          the connection type (TCP or UDP), port number and the address of the
          system at the other end.
        TDIMon TDIMon is similar to TCPView, with the difference that it moni-
         tors network traffic at a different level. TDIMon provides information
         on any socket-level operation performed from any process in the system,
         including the sending and receiving of packets, and so on.
        RegMon RegMon is a registry activity monitor that reports all registry
          access from every program. This is highly useful for locating registry
          keys and configuration data maintained by specific programs.
        PortMon PortMon is a physical port monitor that monitors all serial
          and parallel I/O traffic on the system. Like their other tools, PortMon
          reports traffic separately for each process on the system.
        WinObj This tool presents a hierarchical view of the named objects in
         the system (for information on named objects refer to Chapter 3), and
         can be quite useful for identifying various named synchronization
         objects, and for viewing system global objects such as physical devices,
         and so on.
        Process Explorer Process Explorer is like a turbo-charged version of the
          built-in Windows Task Manager, and was actually designed to replace it.
          Process Explorer can show processes, DLLs loaded within their address
          spaces, handles to objects within each process, detailed information on
          open network connections, CPU and memory usage graphs, and the list
          just goes on and on. Process Explorer is also able to show some level of
          code-related details such as the user and kernel stacks of each thread
          in every process, complete with symbolic information if it is available.
          Figure 4.11 shows some of the information that Process Explorer can
          display.
