
   In this sequence, the first value pushed into the stack is the starting address
of the encrypted data and the second value pushed is the ending address. You
go to Olly’s dump window and dump data starting at 401E32. Now, you need
to create a brute-forcer program and copy that decrypted data into it.
   Before you actually write the program, you need to get a better understand-
ing of the encryption algorithm used by Defender. A quick glance at a decryp-
tion sequence shows that it’s not just XORing the key against each DWORD in
the code. It’s also XORing each 32-bit block with the previous unencrypted
block. This is important because it means the decryption process must begin at
the same position in the data where encryption started—otherwise the decryp-
tion process will generate corrupted data. We now have enough information to
write our little decryption loop for the brute-forcer program.

  for (DWORD dwCurrentBlock = 0;
  dwCurrentBlock <= dwBlockCount;
  dwCurrentBlock++)
  {
  dwDecryptedData[dwCurrentBlock] = dwEncryptedData[dwCurrentBlock] ^
   dwCurrentKey;
   dwDecryptedData[dwCurrentBlock] ^= dwPrevBlock;
   dwPrevBlock = dwEncryptedData[dwCurrentBlock];
  }

   This loop must be executed for each key! After decryption is completed you
search for your token in the decrypted block. If you find it, you’ve apparently
hit the correct key. If not, you increment your key by one and try to decrypt
and search for the token again. Here’s the token searching logic.

  PBYTE pbCurrent = (PBYTE) memchr(dwDecryptedData, Sequence[0],
                                 sizeof(dwEncryptedData));
  while (pbCurrent)
  {
    if (memcmp(pbCurrent, Sequence, sizeof(Sequence)) == 0)
    {
       printf (“Found our sequence! Key is 0x%08x.\n”, dwCurrentKey);
      _exit(1);
    }
    pbCurrent++;
    pbCurrent = (PBYTE) memchr(pbCurrent, Sequence[0],
     sizeof(dwEncryptedData) - (pbCurrent - (PBYTE) dwDecryptedData));
  }

   Realizing that all of this must be executed 4,294,967,296 times, you can start
to see why this is going to take a little while to complete. Now, consider that
this is merely a 32-bit key! A 64-bit key would have taken 4,294,967,296 _ 232
iterations to complete. At 4,294,967,296 iterations per-minute, it would still
take about 8,000 years to go over all possible keys.

        Now, all that’s missing is the encrypted data and the token sequence. Here
      are the two arrays you’re dealing with here:

        DWORD dwEncryptedData[] = {
        0x5AA37BEB,    0xD7321D42,      0x2618DDF9,     0x2F1794E3,
        0x1DE51172,    0x8BDBD150,      0xBB2954C1,     0x678CB4E3,
        0x5DD701F9,    0xE11679A6,      0x501CD9A0,     0x685251B9,
        0xD6F355EE,    0xE401D07F,      0x10C218A5,     0x22593307,
        0x10133778,    0x22594B07,      0x1E134B78,     0xC5093727,
        0xB016083D,    0x8A4C8DAC,      0x1BB759E3,     0x550A5611,
        0x140D1DF4,    0xE8CE15C5,      0x47326D27,     0xF3F1AD7D,
        0x42FB734C,    0xF34DF691,      0xAB07368B,     0xE5B2080F,
        0xCDC6C492,    0x5BF8458B,      0x8B55C3C9 };

        unsigned char Sequence[] = {0xC7, 0x45, 0xFC, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00 };

         At this point you’re ready to build this program and run it (preferably with
      all compiler optimizations enabled, to quicken the process as much as possi-
      ble). After a few minutes, you get the following output.

        Found our sequence! Key is 0xb14ac01a.

         Very nice! It looks like you found what you were looking for. B14AC01A is
      our key. This means that the correct serial can be calculated using Serial=LOW
      PART(NameSerial) * VolumeSerial – B14AC01A. The question now is why is the
      serial 64 bits long? Is it possible that the upper 32 bits are unused?
         Let’s worry about that later. For now, you can create a little keygen program
      that will calculate a NameSerial and this algorithm and give you a (hope-
      fully) valid serial number that you can feed into Defender. The algorithm
      is quite trivial. Converting a name string to a 64-bit number is done using
      the algorithm described in Figure 11.16. Here’s a C implementation of that
      algorithm.

        __int64 NameToInt64(LPWSTR pwszName)
        {
          __int64 Result = 0;
          int iPosition = 0;
          while (*pwszName)
          {
            Result += (__int64) *pwszName << (__int64) (*pwszName % 48);
            pwszName++;
            iPosition++;
          }

            return Result;
        }

  The return value from this function can be fed into the following code:

    char name[256];
    char fsname[256];
    DWORD complength;
    DWORD VolumeSerialNumber;
    GetVolumeInformation(“C:\\”, name, sizeof(name), &VolumeSerialNumber,
   &complength, 0, fsname, sizeof(fsname));
    printf (“Volume serial number is: 0x%08x\n”, VolumeSerialNumber);
    printf (“Computing serial for name: %s\n”, argv[1]);
    WCHAR wszName[256];
    mbstowcs(wszName, argv[1], 256);
    unsigned __int64 Name = NameToInt64(wszName);
    ULONG FirstNum = (ULONG) Name * VolumeSerialNumber;
    unsigned __int64 Result = FirstNum - (ULONG) 0xb14ac01a;

    printf (“Name number is: %08x%08x\n”,
  (ULONG) (Name >> 32), (ULONG) Name);
    printf (“Name * VolumeSerialNumber is: %08x\n”, FirstNum);
    printf (“Serial number is: %08x%08x\n”,
  (ULONG) (Result >> 32), (ULONG) Result);

  This is the code for the keygen program. When you run it with the name
John Doe, you get the following output.

  Volume serial number is: 0x6c69e863
  Computing serial for name: John Doe
  Name number is: 000000212ccaf4a0
  Name * VolumeSerialNumber is: 15cd99e0
  Serial number is: 000000006482d9c6

   Naturally, you’ll see different values because your volume serial number is
different. The final number is what you have to feed into Defender. Let’s see if
it works! You type “John Doe” and 000000006482D9C6 (or whatever your
serial number is) as the command-line parameters and launch Defender. No
luck. You’re still getting the “Sorry” message. Looks like you’re going to have
to step into that encrypted function and see what it does.
   The encrypted function starts with a NtDelayExecution and proceeds to
call the inverse twin of that 64-bit left-shifter function you ran into earlier. This
one does the same thing only with right shifts (32 of them to be exact).
Defender is doing something you’ve seen it do before: It’s computing LOW
PART(NameSerial) * VolumeSerial – HIGHPART(TypedSerial). It then does some-
thing that signals some more bad news: It returns the result from the preced-
ing calculation to the caller.
   This is bad news because, as you probably remember, this function’s return
value is used for decrypting the function that called it. It looks like the high
part of the typed serial is also somehow taking part in the decryption process.

      You’re going to have to brute-force the calling function as well—it’s the only
      way to find this key.
        In this function, the encrypted code starts at 401FED and ends at 40207F.
      In looking at the encryption/decryption local variable, you can see that it’s at
      the same offset [EBP-4] as in the previous function. This is good because it
      means that you’ll be looking for the same byte sequence:

        unsigned char Sequence[] = {0xC7, 0x45, 0xFC, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00 };

        Of course, the data is different because it’s a different function, so you copy
      the new function’s data over into the brute-forcer program and let it run. Sure
      enough, after about 10 minutes or so you get the answer:

        Found our sequence! Key is 0x8ed105c2.

         Let’s immediately fix the keygen to correctly compute the high-order word
      of the serial number and try it out. Here’s the corrected keygen code.

        unsigned __int64 Name = NameToInt64(wszName);
        ULONG FirstNum = (ULONG) Name * VolumeSerialNumber;
        unsigned __int64 Result = FirstNum - (ULONG) 0xb14ac01a;
        Result |= (unsigned __int64) (FirstNum - 0x8ed105c2) << 32;

        printf (“Name number is: %08x%08x\n”,
              (ULONG) (Name >> 32), (ULONG) Name);
        printf (“Name * VolumeSerialNumber is: %08x\n”, FirstNum);
        printf (“Serial number is: %08x%08x\n”,
              (ULONG) (Result >> 32), (ULONG) Result);

        Running this corrected keygen with “John Doe” as the username, you get
      the following output:

        Volume serial number is: 0x6c69e863
        Computing serial for name: John Doe
        Name number is: 000000212ccaf4a0
        Name * VolumeSerialNumber is: 15cd99e0
        Serial number is: 86fc941e6482d9c6

        As expected, the low-order word of the serial number is identical, but you
      now have a full result, including the high-order word. You immediately try
      and run this data by Defender: Defender “John Doe” 86fc941e6482d9c6 (again,
      this number will vary depending on the volume serial number). Here’s
      Defender’s output:

        Defender Version 1.0 - Written by Eldad Eilam
        That is correct! Way to go!

   Congratulations! You’ve just cracked Defender! This is quite impressive,
considering that Defender is quite a complex protection technology, even com-
pared to top-dollar commercial protection systems. If you don’t fully under-
stand every step of the process you just undertook, fear not. You should
probably practice on reversing Defender a little bit and quickly go over this
chapter again. You can take comfort in the fact that once you get to the point
where you can easily crack Defender, you are a world-class cracker. Again, I
urge you to only use this knowledge in good ways, not for stealing. Be a good
cracker, not a greedy cracker.

Protection Technologies in Defender
Let’s try and summarize the protection technologies you’ve encountered in
Defender and attempt to evaluate their effectiveness. This can also be seen as
a good “executive summary” of Defender for those who aren’t in the mood for
50 pages of disassembled code.
   First of all, it’s important to understand that Defender is a relatively power-
ful protection compared to many commercial protection technologies, but it
could definitely be improved. In fact, I intentionally limited its level of protec-
tion to make it practical to crack within the confines of this book. Were it not
for these constraints, cracking would have taken a lot longer.

Localized Function-Level Encryption
Like many copy protection and executable packing technologies, Defender
stores most of its key code in an encrypted form. This is a good design because
it at least prevents crackers from elegantly loading the program in a disassem-
bler such as IDA Pro and easily analyzing the entire program. From a live-
debugging perspective encryption is good because it prevents or makes it
more difficult to set breakpoints on the code.
   Of course, most protection schemes just encrypt the entire program using a
single key that is readily available somewhere in the program. This makes it
exceedingly easy to write an “unpacker” program that automatically decrypts
the entire program and creates a new, decrypted version of the program.
   The beauty of Defender’s encryption approach is that it makes it much more
difficult to create automatic unpackers because the decryption key for each
encrypted code block is obtained at runtime.

Relatively Strong Cipher Block Chaining
Defender uses a fairly solid, yet simple encryption algorithm called Cipher
Block Chaining (CBC) (see Applied Cryptography, Second Edition by Bruce
Schneier [Schneier2]). The idea is to simply XOR each plaintext block with the

      previous, encrypted block, and then to XOR the result with the key. This algo-
      rithm is quite secure and should not be compared to a simple XOR algorithm,
      which is highly vulnerable. In a simple XOR algorithm, the key is fairly easily
      retrievable as soon as you determine its length. All you have to do is find bytes
      that you know are encrypted within your encrypted block and XOR them with
      the encrypted data. The result is the key (assuming that you have at least as
      many bytes as the length of the key).
         Of course, as I’ve demonstrated, a CBC is vulnerable to brute-force attacks,
      but for this it would be enough to just increase the key length to 64-bits or
      above. The real problem in copy protection technologies is that eventually the
      key must be available to the program, and without special hardware it is
      impossible to hide the key from cracker’s eyes.

      Reencrypting
      Defender reencrypts each function before that function returns to the caller.
      This creates an (admittedly minor) inconvenience to crackers because they
      never get to the point where they have the entire program decrypted in mem-
      ory (which is a perfect time to dump the entire decrypted program to a file and
      then conveniently reverse it from there).

      Obfuscated Application/Operating System Interface
      One of the key protection features in Defender is its obfuscated interface with
      the operating system, which is actually quite unusual. The idea is to make it
      very difficult to identify calls from the program into the operating system, and
      almost impossible to set breakpoints on operating system APIs. This greatly
      complicates cracking because most crackers rely on operating system calls for
      finding important code areas in the target program (think of the Message
      BoxA call you caught in our KeygenMe3 session).
         The interface attempts to attach to the operating system without making a
      single direct API call. This is done by manually finding the first system com-
      ponent (NTDLL.DLL) using the TEB, and then manually searching through its
      export table for APIs.
         Except for a single call that takes place during initialization, APIs are never
      called through the user-mode component. All user-mode OS components are
      copied to a random memory address when the program starts, and the OS is
      accessed through this copied code instead of using the original module. Any
      breakpoints placed on any user-mode API would never be hit. Needless to say,
      this has a significant memory consumption impact on the program and a cer-
      tain performance impact (because the program must copy significant amounts
      of code every time it is started).

    To make it very difficult to determine which API the program is trying to
call APIs are searched using a checksum value computed from their names,
instead of storing their actual names. Retrieving the API name from its check-
sum is not possible.
    There are several weaknesses in this technique. First of all, the implementa-
tion in Defender maintained the APIs order from the export table, which sim-
plified the process of determining which API was being called. Randomly
reorganizing the table during initialization would prevent crackers from using
this approach. Also, for some APIs, it is possible to just directly step into the
kernel in a kernel debugger and find out which API is being called. There
doesn’t seem to be a simple way to work around this problem, but keep in
mind that this is primarily true for native NTDLL APIs, and is less true for
Win32 APIs.
    One more thing—remember how you saw that Defender was statically
linked to KERNEL32.DLL and had an import entry for IsDebuggerPresent?
The call to that API was obviously irrelevant—it was actually in unreachable
code. The reason I added that call was that older versions of Windows
(Windows NT 4.0 and Windows 2000) just wouldn’t let Defender load without
it. It looks like Windows expects all programs to make at least one system call.

Processor Time-Stamp Verification Thread
Defender includes what is, in my opinion, a fairly solid mechanism for making
the process of live debugging on the protected application very difficult. The
idea is to create a dedicated thread that constantly monitors the hardware
time-stamp counter and kills the process if it looks like the process has been
stopped in some way (as in by a debugger). It is important to directly access
the counter using a low-level instruction such as RDTSC and not using some
system API, so that crackers can’t just hook or replace the function that obtains
this value.
   Combined with a good encryption on each key function a verification
thread makes reversing the program a lot more annoying than it would have
been otherwise. Keep in mind that without encryption this technique wouldn’t
be very effective because crackers can just load the program in a disassembler
and read the code.
   Why was it so easy for us to remove the time-stamp verification thread in
our cracking session? As I’ve already mentioned, I’ve intentionally made
Defender somewhat easier to break to make it feasible to crack in the confines
of this chapter. The following are several modifications that would make a
time-stamp verification thread far more difficult to remove (of course it would
always remain possible to remove, but the question is how long it would take):

        ■■   Adding periodical checksum calculations from the main thread that
             verify the verification thread. If there’s a checksum mismatch, someone
             has patched the verification thread—terminate immediately.
        ■■   Checksums must be stored within the code, rather than in some central-
             ized location. The same goes for the actual checksum verifications—
             they must be inlined and not implemented in one single function. This
             would make it very difficult to eliminate the checks or modify the
             checksum.
        ■■   Store a global handle to the verification thread. With each checksum
             verification ensure the thread is still running. If it’s not, terminate the
             program immediately.
         One thing that should be noted is that in its current implementation the ver-
      ification thread is slightly dangerous. It is reliable enough for a cracking exer-
      cise, but not for anything beyond that. The relatively short period and the fact
      that it’s running in normal priority means that it’s possible that it will termi-
      nate the process unjustly, without a debugger.
         In a commercial product environment the counter constant should probably
      be significantly higher and should probably be calculated in runtime based on
      the counter’s update speed. In addition, the thread should be set to a higher
      priority in order to make sure higher priority threads don’t prevent it from
      receiving CPU time and generate false positives.

      Runtime Generation of Decryption Keys
      Generating decryption keys in runtime is important because it means that the
      program could never be automatically unpacked. There are many ways to
      obtain keys in runtime, and Defender employs two methods.

      Interdependent Keys
      Some of the individual functions in Defender are encrypted using interdepen-
      dent keys, which are keys that are calculated in runtime from some other pro-
      gram data. In Defender’s case I’ve calculated a checksum during the
      reencryption process and used that checksum as the decryption key for the
      next function. This means that any change (such as a patch or a breakpoint) to
      the encrypted function would prevent the next function (in the runtime execu-
      tion order) from properly decrypting. It would probably be worthwhile to use
      a cryptographic hash algorithm for this purpose, in order to prevent attackers
      from modifying the code, and simply adding a couple of bytes that would
      keep the original checksum value. Such modification would not be possible
      with cryptographic hash algorithms—any change in the code would result in
      a new hash value.

User-Input-Based Decryption Keys
The two most important functions in Defender are simply inaccessible unless
you have a valid serial number. This is similar to dongle protection where the
program code is encrypted using a key that is only available on the dongle.
The idea is that a user without the dongle (or a valid serial in Defender’s case)
is simply not going to be able to crack the program. You were able to crack
Defender only because I purposely used short 32-bit keys in the Chained Block
Cipher. Were I to use longer, 64-bit or 128-bit keys, cracking wouldn’t have
been possible without a valid serial number.
   Unfortunately, when you think about it, this is not really that impressive.
Supposing that Defender were a commercial software product, yes, it would
have taken a long time for the first cracker to crack it, but once the algorithm
for computing the key was found, it would only take a single valid serial num-
ber to find out the key that was used for encrypting the important code
chunks. It would then take hours until a keygen that includes the secret keys
within it would be made available online. Remember: Secrecy is only a tempo-
rary state!

Heavy Inlining
Finally, one thing that really contributes to the low readability of Defender’s
assembly language code is the fact that it was compiled with very heavy inlin-
ing. Inlining refers to the process of inserting function code into the body of
the function that calls them. This means that instead of having one copy of the
function that everyone can call, you will have a copy of the function inside
the function that calls it. This is a standard C++ feature and only requires the
inline keyword in the function’s prototype.
   Inlining significantly complicates reversing in general and cracking in par-
ticular because it’s difficult to tell where you are in the target program—clearly
defined function calls really make it easier for reversers. From a cracking
standpoint, it is more difficult to patch an inlined function because you must
find every instance of the code, instead of just patching the function and have
all calls go to the patched version.

Conclusion
In this chapter, you uncovered the fascinating world of cracking and saw just
closely related it is to reversing. Of course, cracking has no practical value
other than the educational value of learning about copy protection technolo-
gies. Still, cracking is a serious reversing challenge, and many people find it

      very challenging and enjoyable. If you enjoyed the reversing sessions pre-
      sented in this chapter, you might enjoy cracking some of the many crackmes
      available online. One recommended Web site that offers crackmes at a variety
      of different levels (and for a variety of platforms) is www.crackmes.de.
      Enjoy!
         As a final reminder, I would like to reiterate the obvious: Cracking commer-
      cial copy protection mechanisms is considered illegal in most countries. Please
      honor the legal and moral right of software developers and other copyright
      owners to reap the fruit of their efforts!
              PA R T

              IV
Beyond Disassembly
                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                  12

                                           Reversing .NET

This book has so far focused on just one reverse-engineering platform: native
code written for IA-32 and compatible processors. Even though there are
many programs that fall under this category, it still makes sense to discuss
other, emerging development platforms that might become more popular in
the future. There are endless numbers of such platforms. I could discuss other
operating systems that run under IA-32 such as Linux, or discuss other plat-
forms that use entirely different operating systems and different processor
architectures, such as Apple Macintosh. Beyond operating systems and
processor architectures, there are also high-level platforms that use a special
assembly language of their own, and can run under any platform. These are
virtual-machine-based platforms such as Java and .NET.
  Even though Java has grown to be an extremely powerful and popular pro-
gramming language, this chapter focuses exclusively on Microsoft’s .NET
platform. There are several reasons why I chose .NET over Java. First of all,
Java has been around longer than .NET, and the subject of Java reverse engi-
neering has been covered quite extensively in various articles and online
resources. Additionally, I think it would be fair to say that Microsoft technolo-
gies have a general tendency of attracting large numbers of hackers and
reversers. The reason why that is so is the subject of some debate, and I won’t
get into it here.
  In this chapter, I will be covering the basic techniques for reverse engineer-
ing .NET programs. This requires that you become familiar with some of the

      ground rules of the .NET platform, as well as with the native language of the
      .NET platform: MSIL. I’ll go over some simple MSIL code samples and analyze
      them just as I did with IA-32 code in earlier chapters. Finally, I’ll introduce
      some tools that are specific to .NET (and to other bytecode-based platforms)
      such as obfuscators and decompilers.

      Ground Rules
      Let’s get one thing straight: reverse engineering of .NET applications is an
      entirely different ballgame compared to what I’ve discussed so far. Funda-
      mentally, reversing a .NET program is an incredibly trivial task. .NET pro-
      grams are compiled into an intermediate language (or bytecode) called MSIL
      (Microsoft Intermediate Language). MSIL is highly detailed; it contains far
      more high-level information regarding the original program than an IA-32
      compiled program does. These details include the full definition of every data
      structure used in the program, along with the names of almost every symbol
      used in the program. That’s right: The names of every object, data member,
      and member function are included in every .NET binary—that’s how the .NET
      runtime (the CLR) can find these objects at runtime!
         This not only greatly simplifies the process of reversing a program by read-
      ing its MSIL code, but it also opens the door to an entirely different level of
      reverse-engineering approaches. There are .NET decompilers that can accu-
      rately recover a source-code-level representation of most .NET programs. The
      resulting code is highly readable, both because of the original symbol names
      that are preserved throughout the program, but also because of the highly
      detailed information that resides in the binary. This information can be used
      by decompilers to reconstruct both the flow and logic of the program and
      detailed information regarding its objects and data types. Figure 12.1 demon-
      strates a simple C# function and what it looks like after decompilation with the
      Salamander decompiler. Notice how pretty much every important detail
      regarding the source code is preserved in the decompiled version (local vari-
      able names are gone, but Salamander cleverly names them i and j).
         Because of the high level of transparency offered by .NET programs, the
      concept of obfuscation of .NET binaries is very common and is far more pop-
      ular than it is with native IA-32 binaries. In fact, Microsoft even ships an obfus-
      cator with its .NET development platform, Visual Studio .NET. As Figure 12.1
      demonstrates, if you ship your .NET product without any form of obfuscation,
      you might as well ship your source code along with your executable binaries.
                                                                                              Original Function Source Code                         Salamander Decompiler Output

                                                                                           public static void Main()                            public static void Main()
                                                                                                                                 Compilation
                                                                                           {                                                    {
                                                                                             int x, y;                                            for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++)
                                                                                             for (x = 1; x <= 10; x ++)                           {
                                                                                             {                                       IL             for (int j = 1; j <= 10; j++)
                                                                                               for (y = 1; y <= 10; y++)         Executable         {
                                                                                               {                                   Binary             Console.Write("{0 } ", (i * j));
                                                                                                 Console.Write("{0 } ", x*y);                       }
                                                                                               }                                                    Console.WriteLine("");
                                                                                               Console.WriteLine("");                             }
                                                                                                                                Decompilation
                                                                                             }                                                  }
                                                                                            }

Figure 12.1 The original source code and the decompiled version of a simple C# function.
                                                                                                                                                                                         Reversing .NET

      .NET Basics
      Unlike native machine code programs, .NET programs require a special envi-
      ronment in which they can be executed. This environment, which is called the
      .NET Framework, acts as a sort of intermediary between .NET programs and
      the rest of the world. The .NET Framework is basically the software execution
      environment in which all .NET programs run, and it consists of two primary
      components: the common language runtime (CLR) and the .NET class library.
      The CLR is the environment that loads and verifies .NET assemblies and is
      essentially a virtual machine inside which .NET programs are safely executed.
      The class library is what .NET programs use in order to communicate with the
      outside world. It is a class hierarchy that offers all kinds of services such as
      user-interface services, networking, file I/O, string management, and so on.
      Figure 12.2 illustrates the connection between the various components that
      together make up the .NET platform.
         A .NET binary module is referred to as an assembly. Assemblies contain a
      combination of IL code and associated metadata. Metadata is a special data
      block that stores data type information describing the various objects used in
      the assembly, as well as the accurate definition of any object in the program
      (including local variables, method parameters, and so on). Assemblies are exe-
      cuted by the common language runtime, which loads the metadata into mem-
      ory and compiles the IL code into native code using a just-in-time compiler.

      Managed Code
      Managed code is any code that is verified by the CLR in runtime for security,
      type safety, and memory usage. Managed code consists of the two basic .NET
      elements: MSIL code and metadata. This combination of MSIL code and meta-
      data is what allows the CLR to actually execute managed code. At any given
      moment, the CLR is aware of the data types that the program is dealing with.
      For example, in conventional compiled languages such as C and C++ data
      structures are accessed by loading a pointer into memory and calculating the
      specific offset that needs to be accessed. The processor has no idea what this
      data structure represents and whether the actual address being accessed is
      valid or not.
         While running managed code the CLR is fully aware of almost every data
      type in the program. The metadata contains information about class defini-
      tions, methods and the parameters they receive, and the types of every local
      variable in each method. This information allows the CLR to validate opera-
      tions performed by the IL code and verify that they are legal. For example,
      when an assembly that contains managed code accesses an array item, the
      CLR can easily check the size of the array and simply raise an exception if the
      index is out of bounds.

Visual Basic .NET                                   Managed C++
                          C# Source Code                                     J# Source Code
  Source Code                                       Source Code

   Visual Basic                                     Managed C++
                           C# Compiler                                        J# Compiler
  .NET Compiler                                       Compiler
                            (csc.exe)                                          (vjc.exe)
    (vbc.exe)                                       (cl.exe /CLR)

                                         Metadata

                                      Intermediate
                                     Language (IL)
                                       Executable

                                                     Managed Code Verifier

              Garbage
                            Common Language Runtime (CLR)
              Collector
                                                     Just In Time Compiler
                                                              (JIT)

                               .NET Framework

                                   .NET Class Library

                               Operating System
Figure 12.2 Relationship between the common language runtime, IL, and the various
.NET programming languages.

      .NET Programming Languages
      .NET is not tied to any specific language (other than IL), and compilers have
      been written to support numerous programming languages. The following are
      the most popular programming languages used in the .NET environment.
        C# C Sharp is the .NET programming language in the sense that it was
          designed from the ground up as the “native” .NET language. It has a
          syntax that is similar to that of C++, but is functionally more similar to
          Java than to C++. Both C# and Java are object oriented, allowing only a
          single level of inheritance. Both languages are type safe, meaning that
          they do not allow any misuse of data types (such as unsafe typecasting,
          and so on). Additionally, both languages work with a garbage collector
          and don’t support explicit deletion of objects (in fact, no .NET language
          supports explicit deletion of object—they are all based on garbage
          collection).
        Managed C++ Managed C++ is an extension to Microsoft’s C/C++ com-
         piler (cl.exe), which can produce a managed IL executable from C++
         code.
        Visual Basic .NET Microsoft has created a Visual Basic compiler for
          .NET, which means that they’ve essentially eliminated the old Visual
          Basic virtual machine (VBVM) component, which was the runtime com-
          ponent in which all Visual Basic programs executed in previous versions
          of the platform. Visual Basic .NET programs now run using the CLR,
          which means that essentially at this point Visual Basic executables are
          identical to C# and Managed C++ executables: They all consist of man-
          aged IL code and metadata.
        J#     J Sharp is simply an implementation of Java for .NET. Microsoft pro-
             vides a Java-compatible compiler for .NET which produces IL executa-
             bles instead of Java bytecode. The idea is obviously to allow developers
             to easily port their Java programs to .NET.
         One remarkable thing about .NET and all of these programming languages
      is their ability to easily interoperate. Because of the presence of metadata that
      accurately describes an executable, programs can interoperate at the object
      level regardless of the programming language they are created in. It is possible
      for one program to seamlessly inherit a class from another program even if one
      was written in C# and the other in Visual Basic .NET, for instance.

      Common Type System (CTS)
      The Common Type System (CTS) governs the organization of data types in
      .NET programs. There are two fundamental data types: values and references.
      Values are data types that represent actual data, while reference types represent

a reference to the actual data, much like the conventional notion of pointers.
Values are typically allocated on the stack or inside some other object, while
with references the actual objects are typically allocated in a heap block, which
is freed automatically by the garbage collector (granted, this explanation is
somewhat simplistic, but it’ll do for now).
   The typical use for value data types is for built-in data types such as inte-
gers, but developers can also define their own user-defined value types, which
are moved around by value. This is generally only recommended for smaller
data types, because the data is duplicated when passed to other methods, and
so on. Larger data types use reference types, because with reference types only
the reference to the object is duplicated—not the actual data.
   Finally, unlike values, reference types are self-describing, which means that a
reference contains information on the exact object type being referenced. This
is different from value types, which don’t carry any identification information.
   One interesting thing about the CTS is the concept of boxing and unboxing.
Boxing is the process of converting a value type data structure into a reference
type object. Internally, this is implemented by duplicating the object in question
and producing a reference to that duplicated object. The idea is that this boxed
object can be used with any method that expects a generic object reference as
input. Remember that reference types carry type identification information with
them, so by taking an object reference type as input, a method can actually check
the object’s type in runtime. This is not possible with a value type. Unboxing is
simply the reverse process, which converts the object back to a value type. This
is needed in case the object is modified while it is in object form—because box-
ing duplicates the object, any changes made to the boxed object would not
reflect on the original value type unless it was explicitly unboxed.

Intermediate Language (IL)
As described earlier, .NET executables are rarely shipped as native executa-
bles.1 Instead, .NET executables are distributed in an intermediate form called
Common Intermediate Language (CIL) or Microsoft Intermediate Language
(MSIL), but we’ll just call it IL for short. .NET programs essentially have two
compilation stages: First a program is compiled from its original source code
to IL code, and during execution the IL code is recompiled into native code by
the just-in-time compiler. The following sections describe some basic low-level
.NET concepts such as the evaluation stack and the activation record, and
introduce the IL and its most important instructions. Finally, I will present a
few IL code samples and analyze them.

1
 It is possible to ship a precompiled .NET binary that doesn’t contain any IL code, and the pri-
mary reason for doing so is security-it is much harder to reverse or decompile such an executable.
For more information please see the section later in this chapter on the Remotesoft Protector
product.

      The Evaluation Stack
      The evaluation stack is used for managing state information in .NET pro-
      grams. It is used by IL code in a way that is similar to how IA-32 instructions
      use registers—for storing immediate information such as the input and output
      data for instructions. Probably the most important thing to realize about the
      evaluation stack is that it doesn’t really exist! Because IL code is never inter-
      preted in runtime and is always compiled into native code before being exe-
      cuted, the evaluation stack only exists during the JIT process. It has no
      meaning during runtime.
         Unlike the IA-32 stacks you’ve gotten so used to, the evaluation stack isn’t
      made up of 32-bit entries, or any other fixed-size entries. A single entry in the
      stack can contain any data type, including whole data structures. Many instruc-
      tions in the IL instruction set are polymorphic, meaning that they can take dif-
      ferent data types and properly deal with a variety of types. This means that
      arithmetic instructions, for instance, can operate correctly on either floating-
      point or integer operands. There is no need to explicitly tell instructions which
      data types to expect—the JIT will perform the necessary data-flow analysis and
      determine the data types of the operands passed to each instruction.
         To properly grasp the philosophy of IL, you must get used to the idea that
      the CLR is a stack machine, meaning that IL instructions use the evaluation
      stack just like IA-32 assembly language instruction use registers. Practically
      every instruction either pops a value off of the stack or it pushes some kind of
      value back onto it—that’s how IL instructions access their operands.

      Activation Records
      Activation records are data elements that represent the state of the currently
      running function, much like a stack frame in native programs. An activation
      record contains the parameters passed to the current function along with all
      the local variables in that function. For each function call a new activation
      record is allocated and initialized. In most cases, the CLR allocates activation
      records on the stack, which means that they are essentially the same thing as
      the stack frames you’ve worked with in native assembly language code. The IL
      instruction set includes special instructions that access the current activation
      record for both function parameters and local variables (see below). Activation
      records are automatically allocated by the IL instruction call.

      IL Instructions
      Let’s go over the most common and interesting IL instructions, just to get an
      idea of the language and what it looks like. Table 12.1 provides descriptions for
      some of the most popular instructions in the IL instruction set. Note that the
      instruction set contains over 200 instructions and that this is nowhere near a

complete reference. If you’re looking for detailed information on the individ-
ual instructions please refer to the Common Language Infrastructure (CLI)
specifications document, partition III [ECMA].

Table 12.1   A summary of the most common IL instructions.

  INSTRUCTION NAME                     DESCRIPTION

  ldloc—Load local variable            Load and store local variables to and from
  onto the stack                       the evaluation stack. Since no other
  stloc—Pop value from stack           instructions deal with local variables directly,
  to local variable                    these instructions are needed for transferring
                                       values between the stack and local variables.
                                       ldloc loads a local variable onto the stack,
                                       while stloc pops the value currently at the
                                       top of the stack and loads it into the
                                       specified variable. These instructions take a
                                       local variable index that indicates which local
                                       variable should be accessed.

  ldarg—Load argument                  Load and store arguments to and from the
  onto the stack                       evaluation stack. These instructions provide
  starg—Store a value in an            access to the argument region in the current
  argument slot                        activation record. Notice that starg allows a
                                       method to write back into an argument slot,
                                       which is a somewhat unusual operation.
                                       Both instructions take an index to the
                                       argument requested.

  ldfld—Load field of an object        Field access instructions. These instructions
  stfld—Store into a field of          access data fields (members) in classes and
  an object                            load or store values from them. ldfld reads
                                       a value from the object currently referenced
                                       at the top of the stack. The output value is of
                                       course pushed to the top of the stack.
                                       stfld writes the value from the second
                                       position on the stack into a field in the
                                       object referenced at the top of the stack.

  ldc—Load numeric constant            Load a constant into the evaluation stack.
                                       This is how constants are used in IL—ldc
                                       loads the constant into the stack where it
                                       can be accessed by any instruction.

  call—Call a method                   These instructions call and return from a
  ret—Return from a method             method. call takes arguments from the
                                       evaluation stack, passes them to the called
                                       routine and calls the specified routine. The
                                       return value is placed at the top of the stack
                                       when the method completes and ret
                                       returns to the caller, while leaving the return
                                       value in the evaluation stack.

                                                                             (continued)

Table 12.1   (continued)

        INSTRUCTION NAME               DESCRIPTION

        br – Unconditional branch      Unconditionally branch into the specified
                                       instruction. This instruction uses the short
                                       format br.s, where the jump offset is 1 byte
                                       long. Otherwise, the jump offset is 4 bytes
                                       long.

        box—Convert value type to      These two instructions convert a value type
        object reference               to an object reference that contains type
        unbox—Convert boxed value      identification information. Essentially box
        type to its raw form           constructs an object of the specified type
                                       that contains a copy of the value type that
                                       was passed through the evaluation stack.
                                       unbox destroys the object and copies its
                                       contents back to a value type.

        add—Add numeric values         Basic arithmetic instructions for adding,
        sub—Subtract numeric values    subtracting, multiplying, and dividing
        mul—Multiply values            numbers. These instructions use the first two
        div—Divide values              values in the evaluation stack as operands
                                       and can transparently deal with any
                                       supported numeric type, integer or floating
                                       point. All of these instructions pop their
                                       arguments from the stack and then push the
                                       result in.

        beq—Branch on equal            Conditional branch instructions. Unlike IA-32
        bne—Branch on not equal        instructions, which require one instruction
        bge—Branch on greater/equal    for the comparison and another for the
        bgt—Branch on greater          conditional branch, these instructions
        ble—Branch on less/equal       perform the comparison operation on the
        blt—Branch on less than        two top items on the stack and branch
                                       based on the result of the comparison and
                                       the specific conditional code specified.

        switch—Table switch on value   Table switch instruction. Takes an int32
                                       describing how many case blocks are
                                       present, followed by a list of relative
                                       addresses pointing to the various case
                                       blocks. The first address points to case 0, the
                                       second to case 1, etc. The value that the case
                                       block values are compared against is popped
                                       from the top of the stack.

Table 12.1   (continued)

  INSTRUCTION NAME                     DESCRIPTION

  newarr—Create a zero-based,          Memory allocation instruction. newarr
  one-dimensional array.               allocates a one-dimensional array of the
  newobj—Create a new object           specified type and pushes the resulting
                                       reference (essentially a pointer) into the
                                       evaluation stack. newobj allocates an
                                       instance of the specified object type and
                                       calls the object’s constructor. This instruction
                                       can receive a variable number of parameters
                                       that get passed to the constructor routine. It
                                       should be noted that neither of these
                                       instructions has a matching “free”
                                       instruction. That’s because of the garbage
                                       collector, which tracks the object references
                                       generated by these instructions and frees the
                                       objects once the relevant references are no
                                       longer in use.

IL Code Samples
Let’s take a look at a few trivial IL code sequences, just to get a feel for the lan-
guage. Keep in mind that there is rarely a need to examine raw, nonobfuscated
IL code in this manner—a decompiler would provide a much more pleasing
output. I’m doing this for educational purposes only. The only situation in
which you’ll need to read raw IL code is when a program is obfuscated and
cannot be properly decompiled.

Counting Items
The routine below was produced by ILdasm, which is the IL Disassembler
included in the .NET Framework SDK. The original routine was written in C#,
though it hardly matters. Other .NET programming languages would usually
produce identical or very similar code. Let’s start with Listing 12.1.

  .method public hidebysig static void       Main() cil managed
  {
    .entrypoint
    .maxstack 2
    .locals init (int32 V_0)
    IL_0000:   ldc.i4.1

Listing 12.1 A sample IL program generated from a .NET executable by the ILdasm
disassembler program. (continued)

          IL_0001:    stloc.0
          IL_0002:    br.s        IL_000e

          IL_0004:    ldloc.0
          IL_0005:    call        void [mscorlib]System.Console::WriteLine(int32)
          IL_000a:    ldloc.0
          IL_000b:    ldc.i4.1
          IL_000c:    add
          IL_000d:    stloc.0
          IL_000e:    ldloc.0
          IL_000f:    ldc.i4.s    10
          IL_0011:    ble.s       IL_0004

          IL_0013:   ret
        } // end of method App::Main

Listing 12.1 (continued)

         Listing 12.1 starts with a few basic definitions regarding the method listed.
      The method is specified as .entrypoint, which means that it is the first code
      executed when the program is launched. The .maxstack statement specifies
      the maximum number of items that this routine loads into the evaluation
      stack. Note that the specific item size is not important here—don’t assume 32
      bits or anything of the sort; it is the number of individual items, regardless of
      their size. The following line defines the method’s local variables. This func-
      tion only has a single int32 local variable, named V_0. Variable names are
      one thing that is usually eliminated by the compiler (depending on the specific
      compiler).
         The routine starts with the ldc instruction, which loads the constant 1 onto
      the evaluation stack. The next instruction, stloc.0, pops the value from the
      top of the stack into local variable number 0 (called V_0), which is the first
      (and only) local variable in the program. So, we’ve effectively just loaded the
      value 1 into our local variable V_0. Notice how this sequence is even longer
      than it would have been in native IA-32 code; we need two instructions to load
      a constant into local variable. The CLR is a stack machine—everything goes
      through the evaluation stack.
         The procedure proceeds to jump unconditionally to address IL_000e. The
      target instruction is specified using a relative address from the end of the cur-
      rent one. The specific branch instruction used here is br.s, which is the short
      version, meaning that the relative address is specified using a single byte. If
      the distance between the current instruction and the target instruction was
      larger than 255 bytes, the compiler would have used the regular br instruc-
      tion, which uses an int32 to specify the relative jump address. This short
      form is employed to make the code as compact as possible.

   The code at IL_000e starts out by loading two values onto the evaluation
stack: the value of local variable 0, which was just initialized earlier to 1, and
the constant 10. Then these two values are compared using the ble.s instruc-
tion. This is a “branch if lower or equal” instruction that does both the com-
paring and the actual jumping, unlike IA-32 code, which requires two
instructions, one for comparison and another for the actual branching. The
CLR compares the second value on the stack with the one currently at the top,
so that “lower or equal” means that the branch will be taken if the value at
local variable ‘0’ is lower than or equal to 10. Since you happen to know that
the local variable has just been loaded with the value 1, you know for certain
that this branch is going to be taken—at least on the first time this code is exe-
cuted. Finally, it is important to remember that in order for ble.s to evaluate
the arguments passed to it, they must be popped out of the stack. This is true
for pretty much every instruction in IL that takes arguments through the eval-
uation stack—those arguments are no longer going to be in the stack when the
instruction completes.
   Assuming that the branch is taken, execution proceeds at IL_0004, where
the routine calls WriteLine, which is a part of the .NET class library. Write
Line displays a line of text in the console window of console-mode applica-
tions. The function is receiving a single parameter, which is the value of our
local variable. As you would expect, the parameter is passed using the evalu-
ation stack. One thing that’s worth mentioning is that the code is passing an
integer to this function, which prints text. If you look at the line from where
this call is made, you will see the following: void [mscorlib]System.
Console::WriteLine(int32). This is the prototype of the specific func-
tion being called. Notice that the parameter it takes is an int32, not a string as
you would expect. Like many other functions in the class library, WriteLine
is overloaded and has quite a few different versions that can take strings, inte-
gers, floats, and so on. In this particular case, the version being called is the
int32 version—just as in C++, the automated selection of the correct over-
loaded version was done by the compiler.
   After calling WriteLine, the routine again loads two values onto the stack:
the local variable and the constant 1. This is followed by an invocation of the
add instruction, which adds two values from the evaluation stack and writes
the result back into it. So, the code is adding 1 to the local variable and saving
the result back into it (in line IL_000d). This brings you back to IL_000e,
which is where you left off before when you started looking at this loop.
   Clearly, this is a very simple routine. All it does is loop between IL_0004
and IL_0011 and print the current value of the counter. It will stop once the
counter value is greater than 10 (remember the conditional branch from lines
IL_000e through IL_0011). Not very challenging, but it certainly demon-
strates a little bit about how IL works.

      A Linked List Sample
      Before proceeding to examine obfuscated IL code, let us proceed to another,
      slightly more complicated sample. This one (like pretty much every .NET pro-
      gram you’ll ever meet) actually uses a few objects, so it’s a more relevant
      example of what a real program might look like. Let’s start by disassembling
      this program’s Main entry point, printed in Listing 12.2.

        .method public hidebysig static void Main() cil managed
        {
          .entrypoint
          .maxstack 2
          .locals init (class LinkedList V_0,
                    int32 V_1,
                    class StringItem V_2)
          IL_0000: newobj      instance void LinkedList::.ctor()
          IL_0005: stloc.0
          IL_0006: ldc.i4.1
          IL_0007: stloc.1
          IL_0008: br.s        IL_002b

           IL_000a:    ldstr         “item”
           IL_000f:    ldloc.1
           IL_0010:    box           [mscorlib]System.Int32
           IL_0015:    call          string [mscorlib]System.String::Concat(
                                                              object, object)
           IL_001a:    newobj        instance void StringItem::.ctor(string)
           IL_001f:    stloc.2
           IL_0020:    ldloc.0
           IL_0021:    ldloc.2
           IL_0022:    callvirt      instance void LinkedList::AddItem(class ListItem)
           IL_0027:    ldloc.1
           IL_0028:    ldc.i4.1
           IL_0029:    add
           IL_002a:    stloc.1
           IL_002b:    ldloc.1
           IL_002c:    ldc.i4.s      10
           IL_002e:    ble.s         IL_000a

          IL_0030: ldloc.0
          IL_0031: callvirt    instance void LinkedList::Dump()
          IL_0036: ret
        } // end of method App::Main

Listing 12.2 A simple program that instantiates and fills a linked list object.

   As expected, this routine also starts with a definition of local variables. Here
there are three local variables, one integer, and two object types, LinkedList
and StringItem. The first thing this method does is it instantiates an object
of type LinkedList, and calls its constructor through the newobj instruction
(notice that the method name .ctor is a reserved name for constructors). It
then loads the reference to this newly created object into the first local variable,
V_0, which is of course defined as a LinkedList object. This is an excellent
example of managed code functionality. Because the local variable’s data type
is explicitly defined, and because the runtime is aware of the data type of every
element on the stack, the runtime can verify that the variable is being assigned
a compatible data type. If there is an incompatibility the runtime will throw an
exception.
   The next code sequence at line IL_0006 loads 1 into V_1 (which is an inte-
ger) through the evaluation stack and proceeds to jump to IL_002b. At this
point the method loads two values onto the stack, 10 and the value of V_1, and
jumps back to IL_000a. This sequence is very similar to the one in Listing
12.1, and is simply a posttested loop. Apparently V_1 is the counter, and it can
go up to 10. Once it is above 10 the loop terminates.
   The sequence at IL_000a is the beginning of the loop’s body. Here the
method loads the string “item” into the stack, and then the value of V_1. The
value of V_1 is then boxed, which means that the runtime constructs an object
that contains a copy of V_1 and pushes a reference to that object into the stack.
An object has the advantage of having accurate type identification information
associated with it, so that the method that receives it can easily determine pre-
cisely which type it is. This identification can be performed using the IL
instruction isinst.
   After boxing V_1, you wind up with two values on the stack: the string
item and a reference to the boxed copy of V_1. These two values are then
passed to class library method string [mscorlib]System.String::
Concat(object, object), which takes two items and constructs a single
string out of them. If both objects are strings, the method will simply concate-
nate the two. Otherwise the function will convert both objects to strings
(assuming that they’re both nonstrings) and then perform the concatenation.
In this particular case, there is one string and one Int32, so the function will
convert the Int32 to a string and then proceed to concatenate the two strings.
The resulting string (which is placed at the top of the stack when Concat
returns) should look something like “itemX”, where X is the value of V_1.
   After constructing the string, the method allocates an instance of the object
StringItem, and calls its constructor (this is all done by the newobj instruc-
tion). If you look at the prototype for the StringItem constructor (which is
displayed right in that same line), you can see that it takes a single parameter
of type string. Because the return value from Concat was placed at the top

      of the evaluation stack, there is no need for any effort here—the string is
      already on the stack, and it is going to be passed on to the constructor. Once the
      constructor returns newobj places a reference to the newly constructed object
      at the top of the stack, and the next line pops that reference from the stack into
      V_2, which was originally defined as a StringItem.
         The next sequence loads the values of V_0 and V_2 into the stack and calls
      LinkedList::AddItem(class ListItem). The use of the callvirt
      instruction indicates that this is a virtual method, which means that the spe-
      cific method will be determined in runtime, depending on the specific type of
      the object on which the method is invoked. The first parameter being passed to
      this function is V_2, which is the StringItem variable. This is the object
      instance for the method that’s about to be called. The second parameter, V_0,
      is the ListItem parameter the method takes as input. Passing an object
      instance as the first parameter when calling a class member is a standard prac-
      tice in object-oriented languages. If you’re wondering about the implementa-
      tion of the AddItem member, I’ll discuss that later, but first, let’s finish
      investigating the current method.
         The sequence at IL_0027 is one that you’ve seen before: It essentially incre-
      ments V_1 by one and stores the result back into V_1. After that you reach the
      end of the loop, which you’ve already analyzed. Once the conditional jump is
      not taken (once V_1 is greater than 10), the code calls LinkedList::Dump()
      on our LinkedList object from V_0.
         Let’s summarize what you’ve seen so far in the program’s entry point,
      before I start analyzing the individual objects and methods. You have a pro-
      gram that instantiates a LinkedList object, and loops 10 times through a
      sequence that constructs the string “ItemX”, where X is the current value of
      our iterator. This string then is passed to the constructor of a StringItem
      object. That StringItem object is passed to the LinkedList object using the
      AddItem member. This is clearly the process of constructing a linked list item
      that contains your string and then adding that item to the main linked list
      object. Once the loop is completed the Dump method in the LinkedList
      object is called, which, you can only assume, dumps the entire linked list in
      some way.

      The ListItem Class
      At this point you can take a quick look at the other objects that are defined in
      this program and examine their implementations. Let’s start with the List
      Item class, whose entire definition is given in Listing 12.3.

  .class private auto ansi beforefieldinit ListItem
         extends [mscorlib]System.Object
  {
    .field public class ListItem Prev
    .field public class ListItem Next
    .method public hidebysig newslot virtual
            instance void Dump() cil managed
    {
      .maxstack 0
      IL_0000: ret
    } // end of method ListItem::Dump

     .method public hidebysig specialname rtspecialname
             instance void .ctor() cil managed
     {
       .maxstack 1
       IL_0000: ldarg.0
       IL_0001: call        instance void [mscorlib]System.Object::.ctor()
       IL_0006: ret
     } // end of method ListItem::.ctor

  } // end of class ListItem

Listing 12.3 Declaration of the ListItem class.

   There’s not a whole lot to the ListItem class. It has two fields, Prev and
Next, which are both defined as ListItem references. This is obviously a
classic linked-list structure. Other than the two data fields, the class doesn’t
really have much code. You have the Dump virtual method, which contains an
empty implementation, and you have the standard constructor, .ctor, which
is automatically created by the compiler.

The LinkedList Class
We now proceed to the declaration of LinkedList in Listing 12.4, which is
apparently the root object from where the linked list is managed.

  .class private auto ansi beforefieldinit LinkedList
         extends [mscorlib]System.Object
  {
    .field private class ListItem ListHead
    .method public hidebysig instance void
            AddItem(class ListItem NewItem) cil managed
    {
      .maxstack 2
      IL_0000: ldarg.1

Listing 12.4 Declaration of LinkedList object. (continued)

            IL_0001:   ldarg.0
            IL_0002:   ldfld       class ListItem LinkedList::ListHead
            IL_0007:   stfld       class ListItem ListItem::Next
            IL_000c:   ldarg.0
            IL_000d:   ldfld       class ListItem LinkedList::ListHead
            IL_0012:   brfalse.s   IL_0020

            IL_0014: ldarg.0
            IL_0015: ldfld       class ListItem LinkedList::ListHead
            IL_001a: ldarg.1
            IL_001b: stfld       class ListItem ListItem::Prev
            IL_0020: ldarg.0
            IL_0021: ldarg.1
            IL_0022: stfld       class ListItem LinkedList::ListHead
            IL_0027: ret
          } // end of method LinkedList::AddItem

          .method public hidebysig instance void
                  Dump() cil managed
          {
            .maxstack 1
            .locals init (class ListItem V_0)
            IL_0000: ldarg.0
            IL_0001: ldfld       class ListItem LinkedList::ListHead
            IL_0006: stloc.0
            IL_0007: br.s        IL_0016

            IL_0009:   ldloc.0
            IL_000a:   callvirt    instance void ListItem::Dump()
            IL_000f:   ldloc.0
            IL_0010:   ldfld       class ListItem ListItem::Next
            IL_0015:   stloc.0
            IL_0016:   ldloc.0
            IL_0017:   brtrue.s    IL_0009

            IL_0019: ret
          } // end of method LinkedList::Dump

          .method public hidebysig specialname rtspecialname
                  instance void .ctor() cil managed
          {
            .maxstack 1
            IL_0000: ldarg.0
            IL_0001: call        instance void [mscorlib]System.Object::.ctor()
            IL_0006: ret
          } // end of method LinkedList::.ctor

        } // end of class LinkedList

Listing 12.4 (continued)

   The LinkedList object contains a ListHead member of type ListItem
(from Listing 12.3), and two methods (not counting the constructor): AddItem
and Dump. Let’s begin with AddItem. This method starts with an interesting
sequence where the NewItem parameter is pushed into the stack, followed by
the first parameter, which is the this reference for the LinkedList object.
The next line uses the ldfld instruction to read from a field in the
LinkedList data structure (the specific instance being read is the one whose
reference is currently at the top of the stack—the this object). The field being
accessed is ListHead; its contents are placed at the top of the stack (as usual,
the LinkedList object reference is popped out once the instruction is done
with it).
   You proceed to IL_0007, where stfld is invoked to write into a field in the
ListItem instance whose reference is currently the second item in the stack
(the NewItem pushed at IL_0000). The field being accessed is the Next field,
and the value being written is the one currently at the top of the stack, the
value that was just read from ListHead. You proceed to IL_000c, where the
ListHead member is again loaded into the stack, and is tested for a valid
value. This is done using the brfalse instruction, which branches to the spec-
ified address if the value currently at the top of the stack is null or false.
   Assuming the branch is not taken, execution flows into IL_0014, where
stfld is invoked again, this time to initialize the Prev member of the List
Head item to the value of the NewItem parameter. Clearly the idea here is to
push the item that’s currently at the head of the list and to make NewItem the
new head of the list. This is why the current list head’s Prev field is set to point
to the item currently being added. These are all classic linked list sequences.
The final operation performed by this method is to initialize the ListHead
field with the value of the NewItem parameter. This is done at IL_0020,
which is the position to which the brfalse from earlier jumps to when
ListHead is null. Again, a classic linked list item-adding sequence. The new
items are simply placed at the head of the list, and the Prev and Next fields of
the current head of the list and the item being added are updated to reflect the
new order of the items.
   The next method you will look at is Dump, which is listed right below the
AddItem method in Listing 12.4. The method starts out by loading the current
value of ListHead into the V_0 local variable, which is, of course, defined as
a ListItem. There is then an unconditional branch to IL_0016 (you’ve seen
these more than once before; they almost always indicate the head of a
posttested loop construct). The code at IL_0016 uses the brtrue instruction
to check that V_0 is non-null, and jumps to the beginning of the loop as long
as that’s the case.
   The loop’s body is quite simple. It calls the Dump virtual method for each
ListItem (this method is discussed later), and then loads the Next field from

      the current V_0 back into V_0. You can only assume that this sequence origi-
      nated in something like CurrentItem = CurrentItem.Next in the original
      source code. Basically, what you’re doing here is going over the entire list and
      “dumping” each item in it. You don’t really know what dumping actually
      means in this context yet. Because the Dump method in ListItem is declared
      as a virtual method, the actual method that is executed here is unknown—it
      depends on the specific object type.

      The StringItem Class
      Let’s conclude this example by taking a quick look at Listing 12.5, at the decla-
      ration of the StringItem class, which inherits from the ListItem class.

        .class private auto ansi beforefieldinit StringItem
               extends ListItem
        {
          .field private string ItemData
          .method public hidebysig specialname rtspecialname
                  instance void .ctor(string InitializeString) cil managed
          {
            .maxstack 2
            IL_0000: ldarg.0
            IL_0001: call        instance void ListItem::.ctor()
            IL_0006: ldarg.0
            IL_0007: ldarg.1
            IL_0008: stfld       string StringItem::ItemData
            IL_000d: ret
          } // end of method StringItem::.ctor

          .method public hidebysig virtual instance void
                  Dump() cil managed
          {
            .maxstack 1
            IL_0000: ldarg.0
            IL_0001: ldfld       string StringItem::ItemData
            IL_0006: call        void [mscorlib]System.Console::Write(string)
            IL_000b: ret
          } // end of method StringItem::Dump

        } // end of class StringItem

Listing 12.5 Declaration of the StringItem class.

        The StringItem class is an extension of the ListItem class and contains
      a single field: ItemData, which is a string data type. The constructor for
      this class takes a single string parameter and stores it in the ItemData field.
      The Dump method simply displays the contents of ItemData by calling
      System.Console::Write. You could theoretically have multiple classes

that inherit from ListItem, each with its own Dump method that is specifi-
cally designed to dump the data for that particular type of item.

Decompilers
As you’ve just witnessed, reversing IL code is far easier than reversing native
assembly language such as IA-32. There are far less redundant details such as
flags and registers, and far more relevant details such as class definitions, local
variable declarations, and accurate data type information. This means that it
can be exceedingly easy to decompile IL code back into a high-level language
code. In fact, there is rarely a reason to actually sit down and read IL code as
we did in the previous section, unless that code is so badly obfuscated that
decompilers can’t produce a reasonably readable high-level language repre-
sentation of it.
   Let’s try and decompile an IL method and see what kind of output we end
up with. Remember the AddItem method from Listing 12.4? Let’s decompile
this method using Spices.Net (9Rays.Net, www.9rays.net) and see what it
looks like.

  public virtual void AddItem(ListItem NewItem)
  {
    NewItem.Next = ListHead;
    if (ListHead != null)
    {
      ListHead.Prev = NewItem;
    }
    ListHead = NewItem;
  }

   This listing is distinctly more readable than the IL code from Listing 12.4.
Objects and their fields are properly resolved, and the conditional statement is
properly represented. Additionally, references in the IL code to the this object
have been eliminated—they’re just not required for properly deciphering this
routine. The remarkable thing about .NET decompilation is that you don’t
even have to reconstruct the program back to the original language in which it
was written. In some cases, you don’t really know which language was used
for writing the program. Most decompilers such as Spices.Net let you decom-
pile code into any language you choose—it has nothing to do with the original
language in which the program was written.
   The high quality of decompilation available for nonobfuscated programs
means that reverse engineering of such .NET programs basically boils down to
reading the high-level language code and trying to figure out what the program
does. This process is typically referred to as program comprehension, and ranges
from being trivial to being incredibly complex, depending on the size of the
program and the amount of information being extracted from it.

      Obfuscators
      Because of the inherent vulnerability of .NET executables, the concept of
      obfuscating .NET executables to prevent quick decompilation of the program
      is very common. This is very different from native executables where proces-
      sor architectures such as IA-32 inherently provide a decent amount of protec-
      tion because it is difficult to read the assembly language code. IL code is highly
      detailed and can be easily decompiled into a very readable high-level lan-
      guage representation. Before discussing the specific obfuscators, let’s take a
      brief look at the common strategies for obfuscating .NET executables.

      Renaming Symbols
      Because .NET executables contain full-blown, human-readable symbol names
      for method parameters, class names, field names, and method names, these
      strings must be eliminated from the executable if you’re going to try to prevent
      people from reverse engineering it. Actual elimination of these strings is not
      possible, because they are needed for identifying elements within the pro-
      gram. Instead, these symbols are renamed and are given cryptic, meaningless
      names instead of their original names. Something like ListItem can become
      something like d, or even xc1f1238cfa10db08. This can never prevent any-
      one from reverse engineering a program, but it’ll certainly make life more dif-
      ficult for those who try.

      Control Flow Obfuscation
      I have already discussed control flow obfuscation in Chapter 10; it is the con-
      cept of modifying a program’s control flow structure in order to make it less
      readable. In .NET executables control flow obfuscation is aimed primarily at
      breaking decompilers and preventing them from producing usable output for
      the obfuscated program. This can be quite easy because decompilers expect
      programs to contain sensible control flow graphs that can be easily translated
      back into high-level language control flow constructs such as loops and condi-
      tional statements.

      Breaking Decompilation and Disassembly
      One feature that many popular obfuscators support, including Dotfuscator,
      XenoCode, and the Spices.Net obfuscator is to try and completely prevent dis-
      assembly of the obfuscated executable. Depending on the specific program
      that’s used for opening such an executable, it might crash or display a special
      error message, such as the one in Figure 12.3, displayed by ILDasm 1.1.

Figure 12.3 The ILDasm error message displayed when trying to open an obfuscated
assembly.

   There are two general strategies for preventing disassembly and decompila-
tion in .NET assemblies. When aiming specifically at disrupting ILDasm, there
are some undocumented metadata entries that are checked by ILDasm when
an assembly is loaded. These entries are modified by obfuscators in a way that
makes ILDasm display the copyright message from Figure 12.3.
   Another approach is to simply “corrupt” the assembly’s metadata in some
way that would not prevent the CLR from running it, but would break pro-
grams that load the assembly into memory and scan its metadata. Corrupting
the metadata can be done by inserting bogus references to nonexistent strings,
fields, or methods. Some programs don’t properly deal with such broken links
and simply crash when loading the assembly. This is not a pretty approach for
obfuscation, and I would generally recommend against it, especially consider-
ing how easy it is for developers of decompilers or disassemblers to work
around these kinds of tricks.

Reversing Obfuscated Code
The following sections demonstrate some of the effects caused by the popular
.NET obfuscators, and attempt to evaluate their effectiveness against reverse
engineering. For those looking for an accurate measurement of the impact of
obfuscators on the complexity of the reverse-engineering process, there is cur-
rently no such measurement. Traditional software metrics approaches such as
the McCabe software complexity metric [McCabe] don’t tell the whole story
because they only deal with the structural complexity of the program, while
completely ignoring the representation of the program. In fact, most of the .NET
obfuscators I have tested would probably have no effect on something like the
McCabe metric, because they primarily alter the representation of the pro-
gram, not its structure. Sure, control-flow obfuscation techniques can increase
the complexity of a program’s control-flow graph somewhat, but that’s really
just one part of the picture.
   Let’s examine the impact of some of the popular .NET obfuscators on the
linked-list example and try to determine how effective these programs are
against decompilation and against manual analysis of the IL code.

      XenoCode Obfuscator
      As a first test case, I have taken the linked-list sample you examined earlier
      and ran it through the XenoCode 2005 (XenoCode Corporation, www.
      xenocode.com) obfuscator, with the string renaming and control flow obfus-
      cation features enabled. The “Suppress Microsoft IL Disassembler” feature
      was enabled, which prevented ILDasm from disassembling the code, but it
      was still possible to disassemble the code using other tools such as Decom-
      piler.NET (Jungle Creatures Inc., www.junglecreature.com) or Spices.Net.
      Note that both of these products support both IL disassembly and full-blown
      decompilation into high-level languages. Listing 12.6 shows the Spices.Net IL
      disassembly for the AddItem function from Listing 12.4.

        instance void x5921718e79c67372(class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                          xc1f1238cfa10db08) cil managed
        {
          // Code size: 46 bytes
          .maxstack 8
          IL_0000: ldarg.1
          IL_0001: ldarg.0
          IL_0002: ldfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 x5fc7cea805f4af85::xb19b6eb1af8dda00
          IL_0007: br.s        IL_0017
          IL_0009: ldarg.0
          IL_000a: ldfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 x5fc7cea805f4af85::xb19b6eb1af8dda00
          IL_000f: ldarg.1
          IL_0010: stfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 xcc70d25cd5aa3d56::xd3669c4cce512327
          IL_0015: br.s        IL_0026
          IL_0017: stfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 xcc70d25cd5aa3d56::xbc13914359462815
          IL_001c: ldarg.0
          IL_001d: ldfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 x5fc7cea805f4af85::xb19b6eb1af8dda00
          IL_0022: brfalse.s   IL_0026
          IL_0024: br.s        IL_0009
          IL_0026: ldarg.0
          IL_0027: ldarg.1
          IL_0028: stfld       class xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                 x5fc7cea805f4af85::xb19b6eb1af8dda00
          IL_002d: ret
        }//end of method x5fc7cea805f4af85::x5921718e79c67372

Listing 12.6 IL disassembly of an obfuscated version of the AddItem function from
      Listing 12.4.

   The first thing to notice about Listing 12.6 is that all the symbols have been
renamed. Instead of a bunch of nice-looking names for classes, methods, and
fields you now have longish, random-looking combinations of digits and let-
ters. This is highly annoying, and it might make sense for an attacker to
rename these symbols into short names such as a, b, and so on. They still won’t
have any meaning, but it’d be much easier to make the connection between the
individual symbols.
   Other than the cryptic symbol names, the control flow statements in the
method have also been obfuscated. Essentially what this means is that code
segments have been moved around using unconditional branches. For exam-
ple, the unconditional branch at IL_0007 is simply the original if statement,
except that it has been relocated to a later point in the function. The code that
follows that instruction (which is reached from the unconditional branch at
IL_0024) is the actual body of the if statement. The problem with these kinds
of transformations is that they hardly even create a mere inconvenience to an
experienced reverser that’s working at the IL level. They are actually more
effective against decompilers, which might get confused and convert them to
goto statements. This happens when the decompiler fails to create a correct
control flow graph for the method. For more information on the process of
decompilation and on control flow graphs, please refer to Chapter 13.
   Let’s see what happens when I feed the obfuscated code from Listing 12.6
into the Spices.Net decompiler plug-in. The method below is a decompiled
version of that obfuscated IL method in C#.

  public virtual void x5921718e79c67372(xcc70d25cd5aa3d56
                                         xc1f1238cfa10db08)
  {
    xc1f1238cfa10db08.xbc13914359462815 = xb19b6eb1af8dda00;
    if (xb19b6eb1af8dda00 != null)
    {
      xb19b6eb1af8dda00.xd3669c4cce512327 = xc1f1238cfa10db08;
    }
    xb19b6eb1af8dda00 = xc1f1238cfa10db08;
  }

  Interestingly, Spices is largely unimpressed by the obfuscator and properly
resolves the function’s control flow obfuscation. Sure, the renamed symbols
make this function far less pleasant to analyze, but it is certainly possible.
One thing that’s important is the long and random-looking symbol names
employed by XenoCode. I find this approach to be particularly effective,
because it takes an effort to find cross-references. It’s not easy to go over these
long strings and look for differences.

      DotFuscator by Preemptive Solutions
      DotFuscator (PreEmptive Solutions, www.preemptive.com) is another ob-
      fuscator that offers similar functionality to XenoCode. It supports symbol
      renaming, control flow obfuscation and can block certain tools from dumping
      and disassembling obfuscated executables. DotFuscator supports aggressive
      symbol renaming features that eliminate namespaces and use overloaded
      methods to add further confusion (this is their Overload-Induction feature).
      Consider for example a class that has three separate methods: one that takes no
      parameters, one that takes an integer, and another that takes a Boolean. The
      beauty of Overload-Induction is that all three methods are likely to receive the
      same name, and the specific method will be selected by the number and type
      of parameters passed to it. This is highly confusing to reversers because it
      becomes difficult to differentiate between the individual methods. Listing 12.7
      shows an IL listing for our LinkedList::Dump method from Listing 12.4.

        instance void a() cil managed
        {
          // Code size: 36 bytes
          .maxstack 1
          .locals init(class d V_0)

          IL_0000: ldarg.0
          IL_0001: ldfld           class d b::a
          IL_0006: stloc.0
          IL_0007: br.s            IL_0009
          IL_0009: ldloc.0
          IL_000a: brtrue.s        IL_0011
          IL_000c: br              IL_0023
          IL_0011: ldloc.0
          IL_0012: callvirt        instance void d::a()

          IL_0017: ldloc.0
          IL_0018: ldfld           class d d::b
          IL_001d: stloc.0
          IL_001e: br              IL_0009
          IL_0023: ret
        }//end of method b::a

Listing 12.7 DotFuscated version of the LinkedList::Dump method from Listing 12.4.

         The first distinctive feature about DotFuscator is those short, single-letter
      names used for symbols. This can get extremely annoying, especially consid-
      ering that every class has at least one method called a. If you try to follow the
      control flow instructions in Listing 12.7, you’ll notice that they barely resemble

the original flow of LinkedList::Dump—DotFuscator can perform some
fairly aggressive control flow obfuscation, depending on user settings.
   First of all, the loop’s condition has been moved up to the beginning of the
loop, and an unconditional jump back to the beginning of the loop has been
added at the end (at IL_001e). This structure in itself is essentially nothing
but a pretested loop, but there are additional elements here that are put in
place to confuse decompilers. If you look at the loop condition itself, it has
been rearranged in an unusual way: If the brtrue instruction is satisfied, it
skips an unconditional jump instruction and jumps into the loop’s body. If it’s
not, the next instruction down is an unconditional jump that skips the loop’s
body and goes to the end of the method.
   Before the loop’s condition there is an unusual sequence at IL_0007 that
uses an unconditional branch instruction to simply skip to the next instruction
at IL_0009. IL_0009 is the first instruction in the loop and the unconditional
branch instruction at the end of the loop jumps back to this instruction. It looks
like the idea with that unconditional branch at IL_0007 is to complicate the
control flow graph and have two unconditional branches point to the same
place, which is likely to throw off the control flow analysis algorithms in some
decompilers.
   Let’s run this method through a decompiler and see whether these aggres-
sive control flow obfuscation techniques impact the output from decompilers.
The following code is the output I got from the Spices.Net decompiler for the
routine from Listing 12.7:

  public virtual void a()
  {
    d d = a;
    d.a();
    d = d.b;
    while (d == null)
    {
      return;
    }
  }

   Spices.Net is completely confused by the unusual control flow constructs of
this routine and generates incorrect code. It fails to properly identify the loop’s
body and actually places the return statement inside the loop, even though it
is executed after the loop. The d.a(); and d = d.b; statements are placed
before the loop even though they are essentially the loop’s body. Finally, the
loop’s condition is reversed: The loop is supposed to keep running while d is
not null, not the other way around.
   Different decompilers employ different control flow analysis algorithms,
and they generally react differently to these types of control flow obfuscations.

      Let’s feed the same DotFuscated code from Listing 12.7 into another decom-
      piler, Decompiler.Net and see how it reacts to the DotFuscator’s control flow
      obfuscation.

        public void a ()
        {
             for (d theD = this.a; (theD != null); theD = theD.b)
             {
                  theD.a ();
             }
        }

         No problems here—Decompiler.Net does a good job and the obfuscated
      control flow structure of this routine seems to have no impact on its output.
      The fact is that control flow obfuscations have a certain cat-and-mouse nature
      to them where decompiler writers can always go back and add special heuris-
      tics that can properly deal with the various distorted control flow structures
      encountered in obfuscated methods. It is important to keep this in mind and to
      not overestimate the impact these techniques have on the overall readability of
      the program. It is almost always going to be possible to correctly decompile
      control flow obfuscated code—after all the code always has to retain its origi-
      nal meaning in order for the program to execute properly.
         If you go back to the subject of symbol renaming, notice how confusing this
      simple alphabetical symbol naming scheme can be. Your a method belongs to
      class b, and there are two references to a: one this.a reference and another
      theD.a method call. One is a field in class b, and the other is a method in class
      d. This is an excellent example of where symbol renaming can have quite an
      annoying effect for reversers.
         While I’m dealing with symbol renaming, DotFuscator has another option
      that can cause additional annoyance to attackers trying to reverse obfuscated
      assemblies. It can rename symbols using invalid characters that cannot be
      properly displayed. This means that (depending on the tool that’s used for
      viewing the code) it might not even be possible to distinguish one symbol name
      from the other and that in some cases these characters might prevent certain
      tools from opening the assembly. The following code snippet is our AddItem
      method obfuscated using DotFuscator with the Unprintable Symbol Names
      feature enabled. The following code was produced using Decompiler.Net:

        public void áœ¤ (áœƒ A_0)
        {
             A_0.áœ_ = this.áœ¤;
             if (this.áœ¤ != null)
             {
                  this.áœ¤.áœ¤ = A_0;
             }
             this.áœ¤ = A_0;
        }
