
  As presented here, this function is pretty much impossible to decipher—it’s
very difficult to differentiate between the different symbols. Still, it clearly
shouldn’t be very difficult for a decompiler to overcome this problem—it
would simply have to identify such symbol names and arbitrarily rename
them to make the code more readable. The following sample demonstrates this
solution on the same DotFuscated assembly that contains the unprintable
names; it was produced by the Spices.Net decompiler, which appears to do
this automatically.

  public virtual void \u1700(\u1703 A_0)
  {
    A_0.\u1701 = \u1700;
    if (\u1700 != null)
    {
      \u1700.\u1700 = A_0;
    }
    \u1700 = A_0;
  }

   With Spices.Net automatically renaming those unreadable symbols, this
method becomes more readable. This is true for many of the other, less aggres-
sive renaming schemes as well. A decompiler can always just rename every
symbol during the decompilation stage to make the code as readable as possi-
ble. For example, the repeated use of a, b, and c, as discussed earlier, could be
replaced with unique names. The conclusion is that many of the transforma-
tions performed by obfuscators can be partially undone with the right auto-
mated tools. This is the biggest vulnerability of these tools: As long as it is
possible to partially or fully undo the effects of their transformations, they
become worthless. The challenge for developers of obfuscators is to create irre-
versible transformations.

Remotesoft Obfuscator and Linker
The Remotesoft Obfuscator (Remotesoft, www.remotesoft.com) product is
based on concepts similar to the other obfuscators I’ve discussed, with the dif-
ference that it also includes a Linker component, which can add another layer
of security to obfuscated assemblies. The linker can join several assemblies
into a single file. This feature is useful in several different cases, but it is inter-
esting from the reverse-engineering perspective because it can provide an
additional layer of protection against reverse engineering.
   As I have demonstrated more than once throughout this book, in situations
where very little information is available about a code snippet being analyzed,
system calls can provide much needed information. In my Defender sample
from Chapter 11, I demonstrated a special obfuscated operating system inter-
face for native programs that made it very difficult to identify system calls,

      because these make it much easier to reverse programs. The same problem
      holds true for .NET executables as well: no matter how well an assembly
      might be obfuscated, it is still going to have highly informative calls to the
      System namespace that can reveal a lot about the code being examined.
         The solution is to obfuscate the .NET class library and distribute the obfus-
      cated version along with the obfuscated program. This way, when a System
      object is referenced, the names are all mangled, and it becomes quite difficult
      to determine the actual name of the system call.
         One approach that can sometimes reveal such system classes even after they
      are renamed uses a hierarchical call graph view that shows how the various
      methods interact. Because the System class contains a large amount of code
      that is essentially isolated from the main program (it never makes calls into the
      main program, for instance), it becomes fairly easy to identify system branches
      and at least know that a certain class is part of the System namespace. There
      are several tools that can produce call graphs for .NET assemblies, including
      IDA Pro (which includes full IL disassembly support, by the way).

      Remotesoft Protector
      The Remotesoft Protector product is another obfuscation product that takes a
      somewhat different approach to prevent reverse engineering of .NET assem-
      blies. Protector has two modes of operation. There is a platform-dependent
      mode where the IL code is actually precompiled into native IA-32 code, which
      completely eliminates the IL code from the distributable assembly. This offers
      a significant security advantage because as we know, reversing native IA-32
      code is far more difficult than reversing IL code. The downside of this
      approach is that the assembly becomes platform-dependent and can only run
      on IA-32 systems.
         Protector also supports a platform-independent mode that encrypts the IL
      code inside the executable instead of entirely eliminating it. In this mode the
      Protector encrypts IL instructions and hides them inside the executable. This is
      very similar to several packers and DRM products available for native pro-
      grams (see Part III). The end result of this transformation is that it is not possi-
      ble to directly load assemblies protected with this product into any .NET
      disassembler or decompiler. That’s because the assembly’s IL code is not read-
      ily available and is encrypted inside the assembly.
         In the following two sections, I will discuss these two different protection
      techniques employed by Protector and try and evaluate the level of security
      they provide.

Precompiled Assemblies
If you’re willing to sacrifice portability, precompiling your .NET assemblies is
undoubtedly the best way to prevent people from reverse engineering them.
Native code is significantly less readable than IL code, and there isn’t a single
working decompiler currently available for IA-32 code. Even if there were, it is
unlikely that they would produce code that’s nearly as readable as the code
produced by the average IL decompiler.
   Before you rush out of this discussion feeling that precompiling .NET
assemblies offers impregnable security for your code, here is one other point to
keep in mind. Precompiled assemblies still retain their metadata—it is
required in order for the CLR to successfully run them. This means that it
might be theoretically possible for a specially crafted native code decompiler
to actually take advantage of this metadata to improve the readability of the
code. If such a decompiler was implemented, it might be able to produce
highly readable output.
   Beyond this concept of an advanced decompiler, you must remember that
native code is not that difficult to reverse engineer—it can be done manually,
all it takes is a little determination. The bottom line here is that if you are try-
ing to protect very large amounts of code, precompiling your assemblies is
likely to do the trick. On the other hand, if you have just one tiny method that
contains your precious algorithm, even precompilation wouldn’t prevent
determined reversers from getting to it.

Encrypted Assemblies
For those not willing to sacrifice portability for security, Protector offers
another option that retains the platform-independence offered by the .NET
platform. This mode encrypts the IL code and stores the encrypted code inside
the assembly. In order for Protected assemblies to run in platform-indepen-
dent mode, the Protector also includes a native redistributable DLL which is
responsible for actually decrypting the IL methods and instructing the JIT to
compile the decrypted methods in runtime. This means that encrypted bina-
ries are not 100 percent platform-independent—you still need native decryp-
tion DLLs for each supported platform.
   This approach of encrypting the IL code is certainly effective against casual
attacks where a standard decompiler is used for decompiling the assembly
(because the decompiler won’t have access to the plaintext IL code), but not
much more than that. The key that is used for encrypting the IL code is created
by hashing certain sections of the assembly using the MD5 hashing algorithm.
The code is then encrypted using the RC4 stream cipher with the result of the
MD5 used as the encryption key.

         This goes back to the same problem I discussed over and over again in Part
      III of this book. Encryption algorithms, no matter how powerful, can’t provide
      any real security when the key is handed out to both legal recipients and
      attackers. Because the decryption key must be present in the distributed
      assembly, all an attacker must do in order to decrypt the original IL code is to
      locate that key. This is security by obscurity, and it is never a good thing.
         One of the major weaknesses of this approach is that it is highly vulnerable
      to a class break. It shouldn’t be too difficult to develop a generic unpacker that
      would undo the effects of encryption-based products by simply decrypting
      the IL code and restoring it to its original position. After doing that it would
      again be possible to feed the entire assembly through a decompiler and receive
      reasonably readable code (depending on the level of obfuscation performed
      before encrypting the IL code). By making such an unpacker available online
      an attacker could virtually nullify the security value offered by such encryp-
      tion-based solution.
         While it is true that at a first glance an obfuscator might seem to provide a
      weaker level of protection compared to encryption-based solutions, that’s not
      really the case. Many obfuscating transformations are irreversible operations,
      so even though obfuscated code is not impossible to decipher, it is never going
      to be possible for an attacker to deobfuscate an assembly and bring it back to
      its original representation.
         To reverse engineer an assembly generated by Protector one would have to
      somehow decrypt the IL code stored in the executable and then decompile that
      code using one of the standard IL decompilers. Unfortunately, this decryption
      process is quite simple considering that the data that is used for producing the
      encryption/decryption key is embedded inside the assembly. This is the typi-
      cal limitation of any code encryption technique: The decryption key must be
      handed to every end user in order for them to be able to run the program, and
      it can be used for decrypting the encrypted code.
         In a little experiment, I conducted on a sample assembly that was obfus-
      cated with the Remotesoft Obfuscator and encrypted with Remotesoft Protec-
      tor (running in Version-Independent mode) I was able to fairly easily locate
      the decryption code in the Protector runtime DLL and locate the exact position
      of the decryption key inside the assembly. By stepping through the decryption
      code, I was also able to find the location and layout of the encrypted data.
      Once this information was obtained I was able to create an unpacker program
      that decrypted the encrypted IL code inside my Protected assembly and
      dumped those decrypted IL bytes. It would not be too difficult to actually feed
      these bytes into one of the many available .NET decompilers to obtain a rea-
      sonably readable source code for the assembly in question.
         This is why you should always first obfuscate a program before passing it
      through an encryption-based packer like Remotesoft Protector. In case an
      attacker manages to decrypt and retrieve the original IL code, you want to

make sure that code is properly obfuscated. Otherwise, it will be exceedingly
easy to recover an accurate approximation of your program’s source code sim-
ply by decrypting the assembly.

Conclusion
.NET code is vulnerable to reverse engineering, certainly more so than native
IA-32 code or native code for most other processor architectures. The combi-
nation of metadata and highly detailed IL code makes it possible to decompile
IL methods into remarkably readable high-level language code. Obfuscators
aim at reducing this vulnerability by a number of techniques, but they have a
limited effect that will only slow down determined reversers.
   There are two potential strategies for creating more powerful obfuscators
that will have a serious impact on the vulnerability of .NET executables. One
is to enhance the encryption concept used by Remotesoft Protector and actu-
ally use separate keys for different areas in the program. The decryption
should be done by programmatically generated IL code that is never the same
in two obfuscated programs (to prevent automated unpacking), and should
use keys that come from a variety of places (regions of metadata, constants
within the code, parameters passed to methods, and so on).
   Another approach is to invest in more advanced obfuscating transforma-
tions such as the ones discussed in Chapter 10. These are transformations that
significantly alter the structure of the code so as to make comprehension con-
siderably more difficult. Such transformations might not be enough to prevent
decompilation, but the objective is to dramatically reduce the readability of the
decompiled output, to the point where the decompiled output is no longer
useful to reversers. Version 3.0 of PreEmptive Solution’s DotFuscator product
(not yet released at the time of writing) appears to take this approach, and I
would expect other developers of obfuscation tools to follow suit.
                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                  13

                                            Decompilation

This chapter differs from the rest of this book in the sense that it does not dis-
cuss any practical reversing techniques, but instead it focuses on the inner
workings of one of the most interesting reversing tools: the decompiler. If you
are only interested in practical hands-on reversing techniques, this chapter is
not for you. It was written for those who already understand the practical
aspects of reversing and who would like to know more about how decompilers
translate low-level representations into high-level representations. I personally
think any reverser should have at least a basic understanding of decompilation
techniques, and if only for this reason: Decompilers aim at automating many of
the reversing techniques I’ve discussed throughout this book.
   This chapter discusses both native code decompilation and decompilation
of bytecode languages such as MSIL, but the focus is on native code decompi-
lation because unlike bytecode decompilation, native code decompilation pre-
sents a huge challenge that hasn’t really been met so far. The text covers the
decompilation process and its various stages, while constantly demonstrating
some of the problems typically encountered by native code decompilers.

Native Code Decompilation: An Unsolvable Problem?
Compilation is a more or less well-defined task. A program source file is ana-
lyzed and is checked for syntactic validity based on (hopefully) very strict

      language specifications. From this high-level representation, the compiler gen-
      erates an intermediate representation of the source program that attempts to
      classify exactly what the program does, in compiler-readable form. The program
      is then analyzed and optimized to improve its efficiency as much as possible,
      and it is then converted into the target platform’s assembly language. There
      are rarely question marks with regard to what the program is trying to do
      because the language specifications were built so that compilers can easily
      read and “understand” the program source code.
         This is the key difference between compilers and decompilers that often
      makes decompilation a far more indefinite process. Decompilers read machine
      language code as input, and such input can often be very difficult to analyze.
      With certain higher-level representations such as Java bytecode or .NET MSIL
      the task is far more manageable, because the input representation of the pro-
      gram includes highly detailed information regarding the program, particu-
      larly regarding the data it deals with (think of metadata in .NET). The real
      challenge for decompilation is to accurately generate a high-level language
      representation from native binaries such as IA-32 binaries where no explicit
      information regarding program data (such as data structure definitions and
      other data type information) is available.
         There is often debate on whether this is even possible or not. Some have com-
      pared the native decompilation process to an attempt to bring back the cow
      from the hamburger or the eggs from the omelet. The argument is that high-
      level information is completely lost during the compilation process and that the
      executable binary simply doesn’t contain the information that would be neces-
      sary in order to bring back anything similar to the original source code.
         The primary counterargument that decompiler writers use is that detailed
      information regarding the program must be present in the executable—other-
      wise, the processor wouldn’t be able to execute it. I believe that this is true, but
      only up to a point. CPUs can perform quite a few operations without under-
      standing the exact details of the underlying data. This means that you don’t
      really have a guarantee that every relevant detail regarding a source program is
      bound to be present in the binary just because the processor can correctly exe-
      cute it. Some details are just irretrievably lost during the compilation process.
      Still, this doesn’t make decompilation impossible, it simply makes it more dif-
      ficult, and it means that the result is always going to be somewhat limited.
         It is important to point out that (assuming that the decompiler operates cor-
      rectly) the result is never going to be semantically incorrect. It would usually be
      correct to the point where recompiling the decompiler-generated output
      would produce a functionally identical version of the original program. The
      problem with the generated high-level language code is that the code is almost
      always going to be far less readable than the original program source code.
      Besides the obvious limitations such as the lack of comments, variable names,
      and so on. the generated code might lack certain details regarding the program,
      such as accurate data structure declarations or accurate basic type identification.

Additionally, the decompiled output might be structured somewhat differ-
ently from the original source code because of compiler optimizations. In this
chapter, I will demonstrate several limitations imposed on native code decom-
pilers by modern compilers and show how precious information is often elim-
inated from executable binaries.

Typical Decompiler Architecture
In terms of its basic architecture, a decompiler is somewhat similar to a com-
piler, except that, well . . . it works in the reverse order. The front end, which is
the component that parses the source code in a conventional compiler, decodes
low-level language instructions and translates them into some kind of inter-
mediate representation. This intermediate representation is gradually
improved by eliminating as much useless detail as possible, while emphasiz-
ing valuable details as they are gathered in order to improve the quality of the
decompiled output. Finally, the back end takes this improved intermediate
representation of the program and uses it to produce a high-level language
representation. The following sections describe each of these stages in detail
and attempt to demonstrate this gradual transition from low-level assembly
language code to a high-level language representation.

Intermediate Representations
The first step in decompilation is to translate each individual low-level instruc-
tion into an intermediate representation that provides a higher-level view of
the program. Intermediate representation is usually just a generic instruction
set that can represent everything about the code.
   Intermediate representations are different from typical low-level instruction
sets. For example, intermediate representations typically have an infinite num-
ber of registers available (this is also true in most compilers). Additionally,
even though the instructions have support for basic operations such as addi-
tion or subtraction, there usually aren’t individual instructions that perform
these operations. Instead, instructions use expression trees (see the next sec-
tion) as operands. This makes such intermediate representations extremely
flexible because they can describe anything from assembly-language-like
single-operation-per-instruction type code to a higher-level representation
where a single instruction includes complex arithmetic or logical expressions.
   Some decompilers such as dcc [Cifuentes2] have more than one intermedi-
ate representation, one for providing a low-level representation of the pro-
gram in the early stages of the process and another for representing a
higher-level view of the program later on. Others use a single representation
for the entire process and just gradually eliminate low-level detail from the
code while adding high-level detail as the process progresses.

         Generally speaking, intermediate representations consist of tiny instruction
      sets, as opposed to the huge instruction sets of some processor architecture
      such as IA-32. Tiny instruction sets are possible because of complex expres-
      sions used in almost every instruction.
         The following is a generic description of the instruction set typically used by
      decompilers. Notice that this example describes a generic instruction set that
      can be used throughout the decompilation process, so that it can directly rep-
      resent both a low-level representation that is very similar to the original
      assembly language code and a high-level representation that can be translated
      into a high-level language representation.
        Assignment This is a very generic instruction that represents an assign-
          ment operation into a register, variable, or other memory location (such
          as a global variable). An assignment instruction can typically contain
          complex expressions on either side.
        Push Push a value into the stack. Again, the value being pushed can be
          any kind of complex expression. These instructions are generally elimi-
          nated during data-flow analysis since they have no direct equivalent in
          high-level representations.
        Pop Pop a value from the stack. These instructions are generally elimi-
          nated during data-flow analysis since they have no direct equivalent in
          high-level representations.
        Call Call a subroutine and pass the listed parameters. Each parameter
          can be represented using a complex expression. Keep in mind that to
          obtain such a list of parameters, a decompiler would have to perform
          significant analysis of the low-level code.
        Ret Return from a subroutine. Typically supports a complex expression
          to represent the procedure’s return value.
        Branch A branch instruction evaluates two operands using a specified
          conditional code and jumps to the specified address if the expression
          evaluates to True. The comparison is performed on two expression trees,
          where each tree can represent anything from a trivial expression (such as
          a constant), to a complex expression. Notice how this is a higher-level
          representation of what would require several instructions in native
          assembly language; that’s a good example of how the intermediate rep-
          resentation has the flexibility of showing both an assembly-language-
          like low-level representation of the code and a higher-level
          representation that’s closer to a high-level language.
        Unconditional Jump An unconditional jump is a direct translation of the
         unconditional jump instruction in the original program. It is used during
         the construction of the control flow graph. The meanings of uncondi-
         tional jumps are analyzed during the control flow analysis stage.

Expressions and Expression Trees
One of the primary differences between assembly language (regardless of the
specific platform) and high-level languages is the ability of high-level lan-
guages to describe complex expressions. Consider the following C statement
for instance.

    a = x * 2 + y / (z + 4);

   In C this is considered a single statement, but when the compiler translates
the program to assembly language it is forced to break it down into quite a few
assembly language instructions. One of the most important aspects of the
decompilation process is the reconstruction of meaningful expressions from
these individual instructions. For this the decompiler’s intermediate represen-
tation needs to be able to represent complex expressions that have a varying
degree of complexity. This is implemented using expressions trees similar to
the ones used by compilers. Figure 13.1 illustrates an expression tree that
describes the above expression.
               mov

a
                               add
                     mul

                                           div

           x               2         y
                                                   add

                                           z                4
Figure 13.1 An expression tree representing the above C high-level expression. The
operators are expressed using their IA-32 instruction names to illustrate how such an
expression is translated from a machine code representation to an expression tree.

         The idea with this kind of tree is that it is an elegant structured representa-
      tion of a sequence of arithmetic instructions. Each branch in the tree is roughly
      equivalent to an instruction in the decompiled program. It is up to the decom-
      piler to perform data-flow analysis on these instructions and construct such a
      tree. Once a tree is constructed it becomes fairly trivial to produce high-level
      language expressions by simply scanning the tree. The process of constructing
      expression trees from individual instructions is discussed below in the data-
      flow analysis section.

      Control Flow Graphs
      In order to reconstruct high-level control flow information from a low-level
      representation of a program, decompilers must create a control flow graph
      (CFG) for each procedure being analyzed. A CFG is a graph representation of
      the internal flow with a single procedure. The idea with control flow graphs is
      that they can easily be converted to high-level language control flow con-
      structs such as loops and the various types of branches. Figure 13.2 shows
      three typical control flow graph structures for an if statement, an if-else
      statement, and a while loop.

      (a)                               (b)                           (c)

Figure 13.2 Typical control flow graphs: (a) a simple if statement (b) an if-else
      statement (c) a while loop.

The Front End
Decompiler front ends perform the opposite function of compiler back ends.
Compiler back ends take a compiler’s intermediate representation and convert
it to the target machine’s native assembly language, whereas decompiler front
ends take the same native assembly language and convert it back into the
decompiler’s intermediate representation. The first step in this process is to go
over the source executable byte by byte and analyze each instruction, includ-
ing its operands. These instructions are then analyzed and converted into the
decompiler’s intermediate representation. This intermediate representation is
then slowly improved during the code analysis stage to prepare it for conver-
sion into a high-level language representation by the back end.

  Some decompilers don’t actually go through the process of disassembling the
  source executable but instead require the user to run it through a disassembler
  (such as IDA Pro). The disassembler produces a textual representation of the
  source program which can then be read and analyzed by the decompiler. This
  does not directly affect the results of the decompilation process but merely
  creates a minor inconvenince for the user.

  The following sections discuss the individual stages that take place inside a
decompiler’s front end.

Semantic Analysis
A decompiler front end starts out by simply scanning the individual instruc-
tions and converting them into the decompiler’s intermediate representation,
but it doesn’t end there. Directly translating individual instructions often has
little value in itself, because some of these instructions only make sense
together, as a sequence. There are many architecture specific sequences that
are made to overcome certain limitations of the specific architecture. The
front end must properly resolve these types of sequences and correctly trans-
late them into the intermediate representation, while eliminating all of the
architecture-specific details.
   Let’s take a look at an example of such a sequence. In the early days of the
IA-32 architecture, the floating-point unit was not an integral part of the
processor, and was actually implemented on a separate chip (typically referred
to as the math coprocessor) that had its own socket on the motherboard. This
meant that the two instruction sets were highly isolated from one another,
which imposed some limitations. For example, to compare two floating-point
values, one couldn’t just compare and conditionally branch using the standard
conditional branch instructions. The problem was that the math coprocessor

      couldn’t directly update the EFLAGS register (nowadays this is easy, because
      the two units are implemented on a single chip). This meant that the result of
      a floating-point comparison was written into a separate floating-point status
      register, which then had to be loaded into one of the general-purpose registers,
      and from there it was possible to test its value and perform a conditional
      branch. Let’s look at an example.

        00401000      FLD DWORD PTR [ESP+4]
        00401004      FCOMP DWORD PTR [ESP+8]
        00401008      FSTSW AX
        0040100A      TEST AH,41
        0040100D      JNZ SHORT 0040101D

         This snippet loads one floating-point value into the floating-point stack
      (essentially like a floating-point register), and compares another value against
      the first value. Because the older FCOMP instruction is used, the result is stored
      in the floating-point status word. If the code were to use the newer FCOMIP
      instruction, the outcome would be written directly into EFLAGS, but this is a
      newer instruction that didn’t exist in older versions of the processor. Because
      the result is stored in the floating-point status word, you need to somehow get
      it out of there in order to test the result of the comparison and perform a con-
      ditional branch. This is done using the FSTSW instruction, which copies the
      floating-point status word into the AX register. Once that value is in AX, you
      can test the specific flags and perform the conditional branch.
         The bottom line of all of this is that to translate this sequence into the decom-
      piler’s intermediate representation (which is not supposed to contain any
      architecture-specific details), the front end must “understand” this sequence
      for what it is, and eliminate the code that tests for specific flags (the constant
      0x41) and so on. This is usually implemented by adding specific code in the
      front end that knows how to decipher these types of sequences.

      Generating Control Flow Graphs
      The code generated by a decompiler’s front end is represented in a graph
      structure, where each code block is called a basic block (BB). This graph struc-
      ture simply represents the control flow instructions present in the low-level
      machine code. Each BB ends with a control flow instruction such as a branch
      instruction, a call, or a ret, or with a label that is referenced by some branch
      instruction elsewhere in the code (because labels represent a control flow join).
         Blocks are defined for each code segment that is referenced elsewhere in
      the code, typically by a branch instruction. Additionally, a BB is created after
      every conditional branch instruction, so that a conditional branch instruction

can either flow into the BB representing the branch target address or into the
BB that contains the code immediately following the condition. This concept is
illustrated in Figure 13.3. Note that to improve readability the actual code in
Figure 13.3 is shown as IA-32 assembly language code, whereas in most decom-
pilers BBs are represented using the decompiler’s internal instruction set.

                              00401064   PUSH EAX
                              00401065   PUSH 1008
                              0040106A   PUSH cryptex.00405050
                              0040106F   PUSH ESI
                              00401070   CALL [<&KERNEL32.ReadFile>]

                              00401076   TEST EAX,EAX
                              00401078   JE SHORT cryptex.004010CB

 004010CB   POP EDI
                              0040107A   MOV EAX,[ESP+18]
 004010CC   XOR EAX,EAX
                              0040107E   TEST EAX,EAX
 004010CE   POP ESI
                              00401080   MOV DWORD PTR [ESP+14],1008
 004010CF   POP ECX
                              00401088   JE SHORT cryptex.004010C2
 004010D0   RETN

                                               0040108A   LEA ECX,[ESP+14]
                                               0040108E   PUSH ECX
                                               0040108F   PUSH cryptex.00405050
                                               00401094   PUSH 0
                                               00401096   PUSH 1
                                               00401098   PUSH 0
                                               0040109A   PUSH EAX
                                               0040109B   CALL [<&ADVAPI32.CryptDecrypt>]

                                               004010A1   TEST EAX,EAX
                                               004010A3   JNZ SHORT cryptex.004010C2

                                               004010A5   CALL [<&KERNEL32.GetLastError>]

004010C2    POP EDI
004010C3    MOV EAX,cryptex.00405050           004010AB   PUSH EDI
004010C8    POP ESI                            004010AC   PUSH cryptex.004030E8
004010C9    POP ECX                            004010B1   CALL [<&MSVCR71.printf>]
004010CA    RETN

                                               004010B7   ADD ESP,8
                                               004010BA   PUSH 1
                                               004010BC   CALL [<&MSVCR71.exit>]

Figure 13.3 An unstructured control flow graph representing branches in the original
program. The dotted arrows represent conditional branch instructions while the plain ones
represent fall-through cases—this is where execution proceeds when a branch isn’t taken.

         The control flow graph in Figure 13.3 is quite primitive. It is essentially a
      graphical representation of the low-level control flow statement in the pro-
      gram. It is important to perform this simple analysis at this early stage in
      decompilation to correctly break the program into basic blocks. The process of
      actually structuring these graphs into a representation closer to the one used
      by high-level languages is performed later, during the control flow analysis
      stage.

      Code Analysis
      Strictly speaking, a decompiler doesn’t have an optimizing stage. After all,
      you’re looking to produce a high-level language representation from a binary
      executable, and not to “improve” the program in any way. On the contrary,
      you want the output to match the original program as closely as possible. In
      reality, this optimizing, or code-improving, phase in a decompiler is where the
      program is transformed from a low-level intermediate representation to a
      higher-level intermediate representation that is ready to be transformed into a
      high-level language code. This process could actually be described as the
      opposite of the compiler’s optimization process—you’re trying to undo many
      of the compiler’s optimizations.
         The code analysis stage is where much of the interesting stuff happens.
      Decompilation literature is quite scarce, and there doesn’t seem to be an offi-
      cial term for this stage, so I’ll just name it the code analysis stage, even though
      some decompiler researchers simply call it the middle-end.
         The code analysis stage starts with an intermediate representation of the
      program that is fairly close to the original assembly language code. The pro-
      gram is represented using an instruction set similar to the one discussed in the
      previous section, but it still lacks any real expressions. The code analysis
      process includes data-flow analysis, which is where these expressions are
      formed, type analysis which is where complex and primitive data types are
      detected, and control flow analysis, which is where high-level control flow
      constructs are recovered from the unstructured control flow graph created by
      the front end. These stages are discussed in detail in the following sections.

      Data-Flow Analysis
      Data-flow analysis is a critical stage in the decompilation process. This is
      where the decompiler analyzes the individual, seemingly unrelated machine
      instructions and makes the necessary connections between them. The connec-
      tions are created by tracking the flow of data within those instructions and
      analyzing the impact each individual instruction has on registers and memory

locations. The resulting information from this type of analysis can be used for
a number of different things in the decompilation process. It is required for
eliminating the concept of registers and operations performed on individual
registers, and also for introducing the concept of variables and long expres-
sions that are made up of several machine-level instructions. Data-flow analy-
sis is also where conditional codes are eliminated. Conditional codes are easily
decompiled when dealing with simple comparisons, but they can also be used
in other, less obvious ways.
   Let’s look at a trivial example where you must use data-flow analysis in
order for the decompiler to truly “understand” what the code is doing. Think
of function return values. It is customary for IA-32 code to use the EAX register
for passing return values from a procedure to its caller, but a decompiler can-
not necessarily count on that. Different compilers might use different conven-
tions, especially when functions are defined as static and the compiler
controls all points of entry into the specific function. In such a case, the com-
piler might decide to use some other register for passing the return value. How
does a decompiler know which register is used for passing back return values
and which registers are used for passing parameters into a procedure? This is
exactly the type of problem addressed by data-flow analysis.
   Data-flow analysis is performed by defining a special notation that simpli-
fies this process. This notation must conveniently represent the concept of
defining a register, which means that it is loaded with a new value and using a
register, which simply means its value is read. Ideally, such a representation
should also simplify the process of identifying various points in the code
where a register is defined in parallel in two different branches in the control
flow graph.
   The next section describes SSA, which is a commonly used notation for
implementing data-flow analysis (in both compilers and decompilers). After
introducing SSA, I proceed to demonstrate areas in the decompilation process
where data-flow analysis is required.

Single Static Assignment (SSA)
Single static assignment (SSA) is a special notation commonly used in compilers
that simplifies many data-flow analysis problems in compilers and can assist
in certain optimizations and register allocation. The idea is to treat each indi-
vidual assignment operation as a different instance of a single variable, so that
x becomes x0, x1, x2, and so on with each new assignment operation. SSA can
be useful in decompilation because decompilers have to deal with the way
compilers reuse registers within a single procedure. It is very common for pro-
cedures that use a large number of variables to use a single register for two or
more different variables, often containing a different data type.

         One prominent feature of SSA is its support of ϕ-functions (pronounced “fy
      functions”). ϕ-functions are positions in the code where the value of a register
      is going to be different depending on which branch in the procedure is taken.
      ϕ-functions typically take place at the merging point of two or more different
      branches in the code, and are used for defining the possible values that the
      specific registers might take, depending on which particular branch is taken.
      Here is a little example presented in IA-32 code:

           mov     esi1, 0           ; Define esi1
           cmp     eax1, esi1
           jne     NotEquals
           mov     esi2, 7           ; Define esi2
           jmp     After
        NotEquals:
           mov     esi3, 3           ; Define esi3
        After:
           esi4 = ø(esi2, esi3)      ; Define esi4
           mov eax2, esi4            ; Define eax2

         In this example, it can be clearly seen how each new assignment into ESI
      essentially declares a new logical register. The definitions of ESI2 and ESI3
      take place in two separate branches on the control flow graph, meaning that
      only one of these assignments can actually take place while the code is run-
      ning. This is specified in the definition of ESI4, which is defined using a
      ϕ-function as either ESI2 or ESI3, depending on which particular branch is
      actually taken. This notation simplifies the code analysis process because it
      clearly marks positions in the code where a register receives a different value,
      depending on which branches in the control flow graph are followed.

      Data Propagation
      Most processor architectures are based on register transfer languages (RTL),
      which means that they must load values into registers in order to use them.
      This means that the average program includes quite a few register load and
      store operations where the registers are merely used as temporary storage to
      enable certain instructions access to data. Part of the data-flow analysis
      process in a decompiler involves the elimination of such instructions to
      improve the readability of the code.
         Let’s take the following code sequence as an example:

        mov        eax, DWORD PTR _z$[esp+36]
        lea        ecx, DWORD PTR [eax+4]
        mov        eax, DWORD PTR _y$[esp+32]
        cdq

  idiv       ecx
  mov        edx, DWORD PTR _x$[esp+28]
  lea        eax, DWORD PTR [eax+edx*2]

   In this code sequence each value is first loaded into a register before it is
used, but the values are only used in the context of this sample—the contents
of EDX and ECX are discarded after this code sequence (EAX is used for pass-
ing the result to the caller).
   If you directly decompile the preceding sequence into a sequence of assign-
ment expressions, you come up with the following output:

  Variable1 = Param3;
  Variable2 = Variable1 + 4;
  Variable1 = Param2;
  Variable1 = Variable1 / Variable2
  Variable3 = Param1;
  Variable1 = Variable1 + Variable3 * 2;

   Even though this is perfectly legal C code, it is quite different from anything
that a real programmer would ever write. In this sample, a local variable was
assigned to each register being used, which is totally unnecessary considering
that the only reason that the compiler used registers is that many instructions
simply can’t work directly with memory operands. Thus it makes sense to
track the flow of data in this sequence and eliminate all temporary register
usage. For example, you would replace the first two lines of the preceding
sequence with:

  Variable2 = Param3 + 4;

  So, instead of first loading the value of Param3 to a local variable before
using it, you just use it directly. If you look at the following two lines, the same
principle can be applied just as easily. There is really no need for storing either
Param2 nor the result of Param3 + 4, you can just compute that inside the
division expression, like this:

  Variable1 = Param2 / (Param3 + 4);

   The same goes for the last two lines: You simply carry over the expres-
sion from above and propagate it. This gives you the following complex
expression:

  Variable1 = Param2 / (Param3 + 4) + Param1 * 2;

  The preceding code is obviously far more human-readable. The elimination of
temporary storage registers is obviously a critical step in the decompilation
process. Of course, this process should not be overdone. In many cases, registers

      represent actual local variables that were defined in the original program. Elim-
      inating them might reduce program readability.
         In terms of implementation, one representation that greatly simplifies this
      process is the SSA notation described earlier. That’s because SSA provides a
      clear picture of the lifespan of each register value and simplifies the process of
      identifying ambiguous cases where different control flow paths lead to differ-
      ent assignment instructions on the same register. This enables the decompiler
      to determine when propagation should take place and when it shouldn’t.

      Register Variable Identification
      After you eliminate all temporary registers during the register copy propaga-
      tion process, you’re left with registers that are actually used as variables. These
      are easy to identify because they are used during longer code sequences com-
      pared to temporary storage registers, which are often loaded from some mem-
      ory address, immediately used in an instruction, and discarded. A register
      variable is typically defined at some point in a procedure and is then used
      (either read or updated) more than once in the code.
         Still, the simple fact is that in some cases it is impossible to determine
      whether a register originated in a variable in the program source code or
      whether it was just allocated by the compiler for intermediate storage. Here is
      a trivial example of how that happens:

        int MyVariable = x * 4;
        SomeFunc1(MyVariable);
        SomeFunc2(MyVariable);
        SomeFunc3(MyVariable);
        MyVariable++;
        SomeFunc4(MyVariable);

         In this example the compiler is likely to assign a register for MyVariable,
      calculate x * 4 into it, and push it as the parameter in the first three function
      calls. At that point, the register would be incremented and pushed as a param-
      eter for the last function call. The problem is that this is exactly the same code
      most optimizers would produce for the example that follows as well:

        SomeFunc1(x * 4);
        SomeFunc2(x * 4);
        SomeFunc3(x * 4);
        SomeFunc4(x * 4 + 1);

         In this case, the compiler is smart enough to realize that x * 4 doesn’t need
      to be calculated four times. Instead it just computes x * 4 into a register and
      pushes that value into each function call. Before the last call to SomeFunc4
      that register is incremented and is then passed into SomeFunc4, just as in the
      previous example where the variable was explicitly defined. This is good

example of how information is irretrievably lost during the compilation
process. A decompiler would have to employ some kind of heuristic to decide
whether to declare a variable for x * 4 or simply duplicate that expression
wherever it is used.
  It should be noted that this is more of a style and readability issue that
doesn’t really affect the meaning of the code. Still, in very large functions
that use highly complex expressions, it might make a significant impact on
the overall readability of the generated code.

Data Type Propagation
Another thing data-flow analysis is good for is data type propagation. Decom-
pilers receive type information from a variety of sources and type-analysis
techniques. Propagating that information throughout the program as much as
possible can do wonders to improve the readability of decompiled output.
Let’s take a powerful technique for extracting type information and demon-
strate how it can benefit from type propagation.
   It is a well-known practice to gather data type information from library calls
and system calls [Guilfanov]. The idea is that if you can properly identify calls to
known functions such as system calls or runtime library calls, you can easily
propagate data types throughout the program and greatly improve its readabil-
ity. First let’s consider the simple case of external calls made to known system
functions such as KERNEL32!CreateFileA. Upon encountering such a call, a
decompiler can greatly benefit from the type information known about the call.
For example, for this particular API it is known that its return value is a file han-
dle and that the first parameter it receives is a pointer to an ASCII file name.
   This information can be propagated within the current procedure to
improve its readability because you now know that the register or storage
location from which the first parameter is taken contains a pointer to a file
name string. Depending on where this value comes from, you can enhance the
program’s type information. If for instance the value comes from a parameter
passed to the current procedure, you now know the type of this parameter,
and so on.
   In a similar way, the value returned from this function can be tracked and
correctly typed throughout this procedure and beyond. If the return value is
used by the caller of the current procedure, you now know that the procedure
also returns a file handle type.
   This process is most effective when it is performed globally, on the entire
program. That’s because the decompiler can recursively propagate type infor-
mation throughout the program and thus significantly improve overall output
quality. Consider the call to CreateFileA from above. If you propagate all
type information deduced from this call to both callers and callees of the
current procedure, you wind up with quite a bit of additional type information
throughout the program.

      Type Analysis
      Depending on the specific platform for which the executable was created,
      accurate type information is often not available in binary executables, certainly
      not directly. Higher-level bytecodes such as the Java bytecode and MSIL do
      contain accurate type information for function arguments, and class members
      (MSIL also has local variable data types, which are not available in the Java
      bytecode), which greatly simplifies the decompilation process. Native IA-32
      executables (and this is true for most other processor architectures as well)
      contain no explicit type information whatsoever, but type information can be
      extracted using techniques such as the constraint-based techniques described
      in [Mycroft]. The following sections describe techniques for gathering simple
      and complex data type information from executables.

      Primitive Data Types
      When a register is defined (that is, when a value is first loaded into it) there is
      often no data type information available whatsoever. How can the decompiler
      determine whether a certain variable contains a signed or unsigned value, and
      how long it is (char, short int, and so on)? Because many instructions com-
      pletely ignore primitive data types and operate in the exact same way regard-
      less of whether a register contains a signed or an unsigned value, the
      decompiler must scan the code for instructions that are type sensitive. There
      are several examples of such instructions.
         For detecting signed versus unsigned values, the best method is to examine
      conditional branches that are based on the value in question. That’s because
      there are different groups of conditional branch instructions for signed and
      unsigned operands (for more information on this topic please see Appendix
      A). For example, the JG instruction is used when comparing signed values,
      while the JA instruction is used when comparing unsigned values. By locating
      one of these instructions and associating it with a specific register, the decom-
      piler can propagate information on whether this register (and the origin of its
      current value) contains a signed or an unsigned value.
         The MOVZX and MOVSX instructions make another source of information
      regarding signed versus unsigned values. These instructions are used when
      up-converting a value from 8 or 16 bits to 32 bits or from 8 bits to 16 bits. Here,
      the compiler must select the right instruction to reflect the exact data type
      being up-converted. Signed values must be sign extended using the MOVSX
      instruction, while unsigned values must be zero extended, using the MOVZX
      instruction. These instructions also reveal the exact length of a variable (before
      the up-conversion and after it). In cases where a shorter value is used without
      being up-converted first, the exact size of a specific value is usually easy to
      determine by observing which part of the register is being used (the full 32
      bits, the lower 16 bits, and so on).

   Once information regarding primitive data types is gathered, it makes a lot
of sense to propagate it globally, as discussed earlier. This is generally true in
native code decompilation—you want to take every tiny piece of relevant
information you have and capitalize on it as much as possible.

Complex Data Types
How do decompilers deal with more complex data constructs such as structs
and arrays? The first step is usually to establish that a certain register holds a
memory address. This is trivial once an instruction that uses the register’s
value as a memory address is spotted somewhere throughout the code. At that
point decompilers rely on the type of pointer arithmetic performed on the
address to determine whether it is a struct or array and to create a definition
for that data type.
   Code sequences that add hard-coded constants to pointers and then access
the resulting memory address can typically be assumed to be accessing structs.
The process of determining the specific primitive data type of each member
can be performed using the primitive data type identification techniques from
above.
   Arrays are typically accessed in a slightly different way, without using hard-
coded offsets. Because array items are almost always accessed from inside a
loop, the most common access sequence for an array is to use an index and a
size multiplier. This makes arrays fairly easy to locate. Memory addresses that
are calculated by adding a value multiplied by a constant to the base memory
address are almost always arrays. Again the data type represented by the array
can hopefully be determined using our standard type-analysis toolkit.

  Sometimes a struct or array can be accessed without loading a dedicated
  register with the address to the data structure. This typically happens when a
  specific array item or struct member is specified and when that data structure
  resides on the stack. In such cases, the compiler can use hard-coded stack
  offsets to access individual fields in the struct or items in the array. In such
  cases, it becomes impossible to distinguish complex data types from simple
  local variables that reside on the stack.

   In some cases, it is just not possible to recover array versus data structure
information. This is most typical with arrays that are accessed using hard-
coded indexes. The problem is that in such cases compilers typically resort to
a hard-coded offset relative to the starting address of the array, which makes
the sequence look identical to a struct access sequence.

        Take the following code snippet as an example:

        mov       eax, DWORD PTR [esp-4]
        mov       DWORD PTR [eax], 0
        mov       DWORD PTR [eax+4], 1
        mov       DWORD PTR [eax+8], 2

        The problem with this sequence is that you have no idea whether EAX rep-
      resents a pointer to a data structure or an array. Typically, array items are not
      accessed using hard-coded indexes, and structure members are, but there are
      exceptions. In most cases, the preceding machine code would be produced by
      accessing structure members in the following fashion:

        void foo1(TESTSTRUCT *pStruct)
        {
          pStruct->a = FALSE;
          pStruct->b = TRUE;
          pStruct->c = SOMEFLAG; // SOMEFLAG == 2
        }

         The problem is that without making too much of an effort I can come up
      with at least one other source code sequence that would produce the very
      same assembly language code. The obvious case is if EAX represents an array
      and you access its first three 32-bit items and assign values to them, but that’s
      a fairly unusual sequence. As I mentioned earlier, arrays are usually accessed
      via loops. This brings us to aggressive loop unrolling performed by some com-
      pilers under certain circumstances. In such cases, the compiler might produce
      the above assembly language sequence (or one very similar to it) even if the
      source code contained a loop. The following source code is an example—when
      compiled using the Microsoft C/C++ compiler with the Maximize Speed set-
      tings, it produces the assembly language sequence you saw earlier:

        void foo2(int *pArray)
        {
          for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++)
            pArray[i] = i;
        }

         This is another unfortunate (yet somewhat extreme) example of how infor-
      mation is lost during the compilation process. From a decompiler’s stand-
      point, there is no way of knowing whether EAX represents an array or a data
      structure. Still, because arrays are rarely accessed using hard-coded offsets,
      simply assuming that a pointer calculated using such offsets represents a data
      structure would probably work for 99 percent of the code out there.

Control Flow Analysis
Control flow analysis is the process of converting the unstructured control
flow graphs constructed by the front end into structured graphs that represent
high-level language constructs. This is where the decompiler converts abstract
blocks and conditional jumps to specific control flow constructs that represent
high-level concepts such as pretested and posttested loops, two-way condi-
tionals, and so on.
   A thorough discussion of these control flow constructs and the way they are
implemented by most modern compilers is given in Appendix A. The actual
algorithms used to convert unstructured graphs into structured control flow
graphs are beyond the scope of this book. An extensive coverage of these algo-
rithms can be found in [Cifuentes2], [Cifuentes3].
   Much of the control flow analysis is straightforward, but there are certain
compiler idioms that might warrant special attention at this stage in the
process. For example, many compilers tend to convert pretested loops to
posttested loops, while adding a special test before the beginning of the loop
to make sure that it is never entered if its condition is not satisfied. This is done
as an optimization, but it can somewhat reduce code readability from the
decompilation standpoint if it is not properly handled. The decompiler would
perform a literal translation of this layout and would present the initial test as
an additional if statement (that obviously never existed in the original pro-
gram source code), followed by a do...while loop. It might make sense for
a decompiler writer to identify this case and correctly structure the control
flow graph to represent a regular pretested loop. Needless to say, there are
likely other cases like this where compiler optimizations alter the control flow
structure of the program in ways that would reduce the readability of decom-
piled output.

Finding Library Functions
Most executables contain significant amounts of library code that is linked into
the executable. During the decompilation process it makes a lot of sense to
identify these functions, mark them, and avoid decompiling them. There are
several reasons why this is helpful:
  ■■   Decompiling all of this library code is often unnecessary and adds
       redundant code to the decompiler’s output. By identifying library calls
       you can completely eliminate library code and increase the quality and
       relevance of our decompiled output.
  ■■   Properly identifying library calls means additional “symbols” in the
       program because you now have the names of every internal library call,
       which greatly improves the readability of the decompiled output.

        ■■   Once you have properly identified library calls you can benefit from the
             fact that you have accurate type information for these calls. This infor-
             mation can be propagated across the program (see the section on data
             type propagation earlier in this chapter) and greatly improve readability.
         Techniques for accurately identifying library calls were described in
      [Emmerik1]. Without getting into too much detail, the basic idea is to create sig-
      natures for library files. These signatures are simply byte sequences that repre-
      sent the first few bytes of each function in the library. During decompilation the
      executable is scanned for these signatures (using a hash to make the process
      efficient), and the addresses of all library functions are recorded. The decom-
      piler generally avoids decompilation of such functions and simply incorporates
      the details regarding their data types into the type-analysis process.

      The Back End
      A decompiler’s back end is responsible for producing actual high-level lan-
      guage code from the processed code that is produced during the code analysis
      stage. The back end is language-specific, and just as a compiler’s back end is
      interchangeable to allow the compiler to support more than one processor
      architecture, so is a decompiler’s back end. It can be fairly easily replaced to
      get the decompiler to produce different high-level language outputs.
         Let’s run a brief overview of how the back end produces code from the
      instructions in the intermediate representation. Instructions such as the assign-
      ment instruction typically referred to as asgn are fairly trivial to process
      because asgn already contains expression trees that simply need to be ren-
      dered as text. The call and ret instructions are also fairly trivial. During
      data-flow analysis the decompiler prepares an argument list for call instruc-
      tions and locates the return value for the ret instruction. These are stored
      along with the instructions and must simply be printed in the correct syntax
      (depending on the target language) during the code-generation phase.
         Probably the most complex step in this process is the creation of control flow
      statements from the structured control flow graph. Here, the decompiler must
      correctly choose the most suitable high-level language constructs for repre-
      senting the control flow graph. For instance, most high-level languages sup-
      port a variety of loop constructs such as “do...while”, “while...”, and
      “for...” loops. Additionally, depending on the specific language, the code
      might have unconditional jumps inside the loop body. These must be trans-
      lated to keywords such as break or continue, assuming that such keywords
      (or ones equivalent to them) are supported in the target language.
         Generating code for two-way or n-way conditionals is fairly straightfor-
      ward at this point, considering that the conditions have been analyzed during

the code-analysis stage. All that’s needed here is to determine the suitable lan-
guage construct and produce the code using the expression tree found in the
conditional statement (typically referred to as jcond). Again, unstructured
elements in the control flow graph that make it past the analysis stage are typ-
ically represented using goto statements (think of an unconditional jump into
the middle of a conditional block or a loop).

Real-World IA-32 Decompilation
At this point you might be thinking that you haven’t really seen (or been able
to find) that many working IA-32 decompilers, so where are they? Well, the
fact is that at the time of writing there really aren’t that many fully functional
IA-32 decompilers, and it really looks as if this technology has a way to go
before it becomes fully usable.
   The two native IA-32 decompilers currently in development to the best of
my knowledge are Andromeda and Boomerang. Both are already partially
usable and one (Boomerang) has actually been used in the recovery of real pro-
duction source code in a commercial environment [Emmerik2]. This report
describes a process in which relatively large amounts of code were recovered
while gradually improving the decompiler and fixing bugs to improve its out-
put. Still, most of the results were hand-edited to improve their readability,
and this project had a good starting point: The original source code of an older,
prototype version of the same product was available.

Conclusion
This concludes the relatively brief survey of the fascinating field of decompi-
lation. In this chapter, you have learned a bit about the process and algorithms
involved in decompilation. You have also seen some demonstrations of the
type of information available in binary executables, which gave you an idea on
what type of output you could expect to see from a cutting-edge decompiler.
   It should be emphasized that there is plenty more to decompilation. I have
intentionally avoided discussing the details of decompilation algorithms to
avoid turning this chapter into a boring classroom text. If you’re interested in
learning more, there are no books that specifically discuss decompilation at the
time of writing, but probably the closest thing to a book on this topic is a PhD
thesis written by Christina Cifuentes, Reverse Compilation Techniques [Cifuentes2].
This text provides a highly readable introduction to the topic and describes in
detail the various algorithms used in decompilation. Beyond this text most of
the accumulated knowledge can be found in a variety of research papers on
this topic, most of which are freely available online.

         As for the question of what to expect from binary decompilation, I’d sum-
      marize by saying binary decompilation is possible—it all boils down to setting
      people’s expectations. Native code decompilation is “no silver bullet”, to bor-
      row from that famous line by Brooks—it cannot bring back 100 percent accu-
      rate high-level language code from executable binaries. Still, a working native
      code decompiler could produce an approximation of the original source code
      and do wonders to the reversing process by dramatically decreasing the
      amount of time it takes to reach an understanding of a complex program for
      which source code is not available.
         There is certainly a lot to hope for in the field of binary decompilation. We
      have not yet seen what a best-of-breed native code decompiler could do when
      it is used with high quality library signatures and full-blown prototypes for
      operating system calls, and so on. I always get the impression that many peo-
      ple don’t fully realize just how good an output could be expected from such a
      tool. Hopefully, time will tell.
                                                             ACPHPAEPNTDE IRX

                                                                  A

        Deciphering Code Structures

This appendix discusses the most common logical and control flow constructs
used in high-level languages and demonstrates how they are implemented in
IA-32 assembly language. The idea is to provide a sort of dictionary for typical
assembly language sequences you are likely to run into while reversing IA-32
assembly language code.
   This appendix starts off with a detailed explanation of how logic is imple-
mented in IA-32, including how operands are compared and the various con-
ditional codes used by the conditional branch instructions. This is followed by
a detailed examination of every popular control flow construct and how it is
implemented in assembly language, including loops and a variety of condi-
tional blocks. The next section discusses branchless logic, and demonstrates
the most common branchless logic sequences. Finally, I’ve included a brief dis-
cussion on the impact of working-set tuning on the reversing process for Win-
dows applications.

Understanding Low-Level Logic
The most basic element in software that distinguishes your average pocket cal-
culator from a full-blown computer is the ability to execute a sequence of log-
ical and conditional instructions. The following sections demonstrate the most
common types of low-level logical constructs frequently encountered while

      reversing, and explain their exact meanings. I begin by going over the process
      of comparing two operands in assembly language, which is a significant build-
      ing block used in almost every logical statement. I then proceed to discuss the
      conditional codes in IA-32 assembly language, which are employed in every
      conditional instruction in the instruction set.

      Comparing Operands
      The vast majority of logical statements involve the comparison of two or more
      operands. This is usually followed by code that can act differently based on the
      result of the comparison. The following sections demonstrate the operand
      comparison mechanism in IA-32 assembly language. This process is some-
      what different for signed and unsigned operands.
        The fundamental instruction for comparing operands is the CMP instruction.
      CMP essentially subtracts the second operand from the first and discards the
      result. The processor’s flags are used for notifying the instructions that follow
      on the result of the subtraction. As with many other instructions, flags are read
      differently depending on whether the operands are signed or unsigned.

        If you’re not familiar with the subtleties of IA-32 flags, it is highly
        recommended that you go over the “Arithmetic Flags” section in Appendix B
        before reading further.

      Signed Comparisons
      Table A.1 demonstrates the behavior of the CMP instruction when comparing
      signed operands. Remember that the following table also applies to the SUB
      instruction.

      Table A.1 Signed Subtraction Outcome Table for CMP and SUB Instructions (X represents
      the left operand, while Y represents the right operand)

                                     RELATION
        LEFT           RIGHT         BETWEEN       FLAGS
        OPERAND        OPERAND       OPERANDS      AFFECTED              COMMENTS

        X >= 0         Y >= 0        X=Y           OF = 0 SF = 0 ZF = 1 The two
                                                                        operands are
                                                                        equal, so the
                                                                        result is zero.

        X>0            Y >= 0        X>Y           OF = 0 SF = 0 ZF = 0 Flags are all zero,
                                                                        indicating a
                                                                        positive result,
                                                                        with no overflow.

Table A.1   (continued)

                           RELATION
  LEFT           RIGHT     BETWEEN    FLAGS
  OPERAND        OPERAND   OPERANDS   AFFECTED              COMMENTS

  X<0            Y<0       X>Y        OF = 0 SF = 0 ZF = 0 This is the same
                                                           as the preceding
                                                           case, with both X
                                                           and Y containing
                                                           negative
                                                           integers.

  X>0            Y>0       X<Y        OF = 0 SF = 1 ZF = 0 An SF = 1
                                                           represents a
                                                           negative result,
                                                           which (with OF
                                                           being unset)
                                                           indicates that Y
                                                           is larger than X.

  X<0            Y >= 0    X<Y        OF = 0 SF = 1 ZF = 0 This is the same
                                                           as the preceding
                                                           case, except that
                                                           X is negative and
                                                           Y is positive.
                                                           Again, the
                                                           combination of
                                                           SF = 1 with OF = 0
                                                           represents that Y
                                                           is greater than X.

  X<0            Y>0       X<Y        OF = 1 SF = 0 ZF = 0 This is another
                                                           similar case
                                                           where X is
                                                           negative and Y is
                                                           positive, except
                                                           that here an
                                                           overflow is
                                                           generated, and
                                                           the result is
                                                           positive.

  X>0            Y<0       X>Y        OF = 1 SF = 1 ZF = 0 When X is
                                                           positive and Y is
                                                           a negative
                                                           integer low
                                                           enough to
                                                           generate a
                                                           positive overflow,
                                                           both OF and SF
                                                           are set.

         In looking at Table A.1, the ground rules for identifying the results of signed
      integer comparisons become clear. Here’s a quick summary of the basic rules:
        ■■   Anytime ZF is set you know that the subtraction resulted in a zero,
             which means that the operands are equal.
        ■■   When all three flags are zero, you know that the first operand is greater
             than the second, because you have a positive result and no overflow.
        ■■   When there is a negative result and no overflow (SF=1 and OF=0), you
             know that the second operand is larger than the first.
        ■■   When there is an overflow and a positive result, the second operand
             must be larger than the first, because you essentially have a negative
             result that is too small to be represented by the destination operand
             (hence the overflow).
        ■■   When you have an overflow and a negative result, the first operand
             must be larger than the second, because you essentially have a positive
             result that is too large to be represented by the destination operand
             (hence the overflow).
        While it is not generally necessary to memorize the comparison outcome
      tables (tables A.1 and A.2), it still makes sense to go over them and make sure
      that you properly understand how each flag is used in the operand compari-
      son process. This will be helpful in some cases while reversing when flags are
      used in unconventional ways. Knowing how flags are set during comparison
      and subtraction is very helpful for properly understanding logical sequences
      and quickly deciphering their meaning.

      Unsigned Comparisons
      Table A.2 demonstrates the behavior of the CMP instruction when comparing
      unsigned operands. Remember that just like table A.1, the following table also
      applies to the SUB instruction.

      Table A.2 Unsigned Subtraction Outcome Table for CMP and SUB Instructions (X repre-
      sents the left operand, while Y represents the right operand)

        RELATION
        BETWEEN          FLAGS
        OPERANDS         AFFECTED           COMMENTS

        X=Y              CF = 0 ZF = 1      The two operands are equal, so the result is
                                            zero.

        X<Y              CF = 1 ZF = 0      Y is larger than X so the result is lower than
                                            0, which generates an overflow (CF=1).

        X>Y              CF = 0 ZF = 0      X is larger than Y, so the result is above zero,
                                            and no overflow is generated (CF=0).

  In looking at Table A.2, the ground rules for identifying the results of
unsigned integer comparisons become clear, and it’s obvious that unsigned
operands are easier to deal with. Here’s a quick summary of the basic rules:
  ■■   Anytime ZF is set you know that the subtraction resulted in a zero,
       which means that the operands are equal.
  ■■   When both flags are zero, you know that the first operand is greater
       than the second, because you have a positive result and no overflow.
  ■■   When you have an overflow you know that the second operand is
       greater than the first, because the result must be too low in order to be
       represented by the destination operand.

The Conditional Codes
Conditional codes are suffixes added to certain conditional instructions in
order to define the conditions governing their execution.
   It is important for reversers to understand these mnemonics because virtu-
ally every conditional code sequence will include one or more of them. Some-
times their meaning will be very intuitive—take a look at the following code:

  cmp
  eax, 7
  je
  SomePlace

   In this example, it is obvious that JE (which is jump if equal) will cause a
jump to SomePlace if EAX equals 7. This is one of the more obvious cases
where understanding the specifics of instructions such as CMP and of the con-
ditional codes is really unnecessary. Unfortunately for us reversers, there are
quite a few cases where the conditional codes are used in unintuitive ways.
Understanding how the conditional codes use the flags is important for prop-
erly understanding program logic. The following sections list each condition
code and explain which flags it uses and why.

  The conditional codes listed in the following sections are listed as standalone
  codes, even though they are normally used as instruction suffixes to
  conditional instructions. Conditional codes are never used alone.

Signed Conditional Codes
Table A.3 presents the IA-32 conditional codes defined for signed operands.
Note that in all signed conditional codes overflows are detected using the

      overflow flag (OF). This is because the arithmetic instructions use OF for indi-
      cating signed overflows.

      Table A.3   Signed Conditional Codes Table for CMP and SUB Instructions

                                                     SATISFIED
        MNEMONICS          FLAGS                     WHEN           COMMENTS

        If Greater (G)     ZF = 0 AND                X>Y            Use ZF to confirm
        If Not Less or     ((OF = 0 AND SF = 0) OR                  that the operands
           Equal (NLE)     (OF = 1 AND SF = 1))                     are unequal. Also use
                                                                    SF to check for either
                                                                    a positive result
                                                                    without an overflow,
                                                                    indicating that the first
                                                                    operand is greater, or
                                                                    a negative result with
                                                                    an overflow. The latter
                                                                    would indicate that
                                                                    the second operand
                                                                    was a low enough
                                                                    negative integer to
                                                                    produce a result too
                                                                    large to be
                                                                    represented by the
                                                                    destination (hence the
                                                                    overflow).

        If Greater or      (OF = 0 AND SF = 0) OR    X >= Y         This code is similar
           Equal(GE)       (OF = 1 AND SF = 1)                      to the preceding
        If Not Less (NL)                                            code with the
                                                                    exception that it
                                                                    doesn’t check ZF for
                                                                    zero, so it would also
                                                                    be satisfied by equal
                                                                    operands.

        If Less (L)       (OF = 1 AND SF = 0) OR     X<Y            Check for OF = 1 AND
        If Not Greater    (OF = 0 AND SF = 1)                       SF = 0 indicating that
           or Equal (NGE)                                           X was lower than Y
                                                                    and the result was too
                                                                    low to be represented
                                                                    by the destination
                                                                    operand (you got an
                                                                    overflow and a
                                                                    positive result). The
                                                                    other case is OF = 0
                                                                    AND SF = 1. This is a
                                                                    similar case, except
                                                                    that no overflow is
                                                                    generated, and the
                                                                    result is negative.

Table A.3   (continued)

                                                SATISFIED
  MNEMONICS           FLAGS                     WHEN        COMMENTS

  If Less or          ZF = 1 OR                 X <= Y      This code is the same
     Equal (LE)       ((OF = 1 AND SF = 0) OR               as the preceding code
  If Not              (OF = 0 AND SF = 1))                  with the exception
     Greater (NG)                                           that it also checks ZF
                                                            and so would also be
                                                            satisfied if the
                                                            operands are equal.

Unsigned Conditional Codes
Table A.4 presents the IA-32 conditional codes defined for unsigned operands.
Note that in all unsigned conditional codes, overflows are detected using the
carry flag (CF). This is because the arithmetic instructions use CF for indicat-
ing unsigned overflows.

Table A.4   Unsigned Conditional Codes

                                                SATISFIED
  MNEMONICS            FLAGS                    WHEN        COMMENTS

  If Above (A)         CF = 0 AND ZF = 0        X>Y         Use CF to confirm that
  If Not Below or                                           the second operand is
     Equal (NBE)                                            not larger than the
                                                            first (because then CF
                                                            would be set), and ZF
                                                            to confirm that the
                                                            operands are unequal.

  If Above or          CF = 0                   X >= Y      This code is similar to
     Equal (AE)                                             the above with the
  If Not                                                    exception that it only
     Below (NB)                                             checks CF, so it would
  If Not Carry (NC)                                         also be satisfied by
                                                            equal operands.

  If Below (B)         CF = 1                   X<Y         When CF is set we
  If Not Above or                                           know that the second
     Equal (NAE)                                            operand is greater
  If Carry (C)                                              than the first because
                                                            an overflow could only
                                                            mean that the result
                                                            was negative.

                                                                          (continued)

      Table A.4   (continued)

                                                  SATISFIED
        MNEMONICS           FLAGS                 WHEN           COMMENTS

        If Below or         CF = 1 OR ZF = 1      X <= Y         This code is the same
           Equal (BE)                                            as the above with the
        If Not                                                   exception that it also
           Above (NA)                                            checks ZF, and so
                                                                 would also be
                                                                 satisfied if the
                                                                 operands are equal.

        If Equal (E)        ZF = 1                X=Y            ZF is set so we know
        If Zero (Z)                                              that the result was
                                                                 zero, meaning that the
                                                                 operands are equal.

        If Not Equal (NE)   ZF = 0                Z != Y         ZF is unset so we
        If Not Zero (NZ)                                         know that the result
                                                                 was nonzero, which
                                                                 implies that the
                                                                 operands are unequal.

      Control Flow & Program Layout
      The vast majority of logic in the average computer program is implemented
      through branches. These are the most common programming constructs,
      regardless of the high-level language. A program tests one or more logical con-
      ditions, and branches to a different part of the program based on the result of
      the logical test. Identifying branches and figuring out their meaning and pur-
      pose is one of the most basic code-level reversing tasks.
        The following sections introduce the most popular control flow constructs
      and program layout elements. I start with a discussion of procedures and how
      they are represented in assembly language and proceed to a discussion of the
      most common control flow constructs and to a comparison of their low-level
      representations with their high-level representations. The constructs discussed
      are single branch conditionals, two-way conditionals, n-way conditionals, and
      loops, among others.

      Deciphering Functions
      The most basic building block in a program is the procedure, or function. From
      a reversing standpoint functions are very easy to detect because of function
      prologues and epilogues. These are standard initialization sequences that compilers

generate for nearly every function. The particulars of these sequences depend
on the specific compiler used and on other issues such as calling convention.
Calling conventions are discussed in the section on calling conventions in
Appendix C.
   On IA-32 processors function are nearly always called using the CALL
instruction, which stores the current instruction pointer in the stack and jumps
to the function address. This makes it easy to distinguish function calls from
other unconditional jumps.

Internal Functions
Internal functions are called from the same binary executable that contains
their implementation. When compilers generate an internal function call
sequence they usually just embed the function’s address into the code, which
makes it very easy to detect. The following is a common internal function call.

  Call         CodeSectionAddress

Imported Functions
An imported function call takes place when a module is making a call into a
function implemented in another binary executable. This is important because
during the compilation process the compiler has no idea where the imported
function can be found and is therefore unable to embed the function’s address
into the code (as is usually done with internal functions).
   Imported function calls are implemented using the Import Directory and
Import Address Table (see Chapter 3). The import directory is used in runtime
for resolving the function’s name with a matching function in the target exe-
cutable, and the IAT stores the actual address of the target function. The caller
then loads the function’s pointer from the IAT and calls it. The following is an
example of a typical imported function call:

  call         DWORD PTR [IAT_Pointer]

   Notice the DWORD PTR that precedes the pointer—it is important because it
tells the CPU to jump not to the address of IAT_Pointer but to the address
that is pointed to by IAT_Pointer. Also keep in mind that the pointer will
usually not be named (depending on the disassembler) and will simply con-
tain an address pointing into the IAT.
   Detecting imported calls is easy because except for these types of calls, func-
tions are rarely called indirectly through a hard-coded function pointer. I
would, however, recommend that you determine the location of the IAT early
on in reversing sessions and use it to confirm that a function is indeed

      imported. Locating the IAT is quite easy and can be done with a variety of dif-
      ferent tools that dump the module’s PE header and provide the address of the
      IAT. Tools for dumping PE headers are discussed in Chapter 4.
         Some disassemblers and debuggers will automatically indicate an imported
      function call (by internally checking the IAT address), thus saving you the
      trouble.

      Single-Branch Conditionals
      The most basic form of logic in most programs consists of a condition and an
      ensuing conditional branch. In high-level languages, this is written as an if
      statement with a condition and a block of conditional code that gets executed
      if the condition is satisfied. Here’s a quick sample:

        if (SomeVariable == 0)
                CallAFunction();

         From a low-level perspective, implementing this statement requires a logi-
      cal check to determine whether SomeVariable contains 0 or not, followed by
      code that skips the conditional block by performing a conditional jump if
      SomeVariable is nonzero. Figure A.1 depicts how this code snippet would
      typically map into assembly language.
         The assembly language code in Figure A.1 uses TEST to perform a simple
      zero check for EAX. TEST works by performing a bitwise AND operation on EAX
      and setting flags to reflect the result (the actual result is discarded). This is an
      effective way to test whether EAX is zero or nonzero because TEST sets the zero
      flag (ZF) according to the result of the bitwise AND operation. Note that the con-
      dition is reversed: In the source code, the program was checking whether
      SomeVariable equals zero, but the compiler reversed the condition so that the
      conditional instruction (in this case a jump) checks whether SomeVariable is
      nonzero. This stems from the fact that the compiler-generated binary code is
      organized in memory in the same order as it is organized in the source code.
      Therefore if SomeVariable is nonzero, the compiler must skip the conditional
      code section and go straight to the code section that follows.
         The bottom line is that in single-branch conditionals you must always
      reverse the meaning of the conditional jump in order to obtain the true high-
      level logical intention.

            Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

     mov   eax, [SomeVariable]                   if (SomeVariable == 0)
     test eax, eax                                 CallAFunction();
     jnz   AfterCondition                        ...
     call CallAFunction
  AfterCondition:
     ...

Figure A.1 High-level/low-level view of a single branch conditional sequence.

Two-Way Conditionals
Another fundamental functionality of high-level languages is to allow the use
of two-way conditionals, typically implemented in high-level languages using
the if-else keyword pair. A two-way conditional is different from a single-
branch conditional in the sense that if the condition is not satisfied, the pro-
gram executes an alternative code block and only then proceeds to the code
that follows the ‘if-else’ statement. These constructs are called two-way
conditionals because the flow of the program is split into one of two different
possible paths: the one in the ‘if’ block, or the one in the ‘else’ block.
   Let’s take a quick look at how compilers implement two-way conditionals.
First of all, in two-way conditionals the conditional branch points to the
‘else’ block and not to the code that follows the conditional statement. Sec-
ond, the condition itself is almost always reversed (so that the jump to the
‘else’ block only takes place when the condition is not satisfied), and the
primary conditional block is placed right after the conditional jump (so that
the conditional code gets executed if the condition is satisfied). The conditional
block always ends with an unconditional jump that essentially skips the
‘else’ block—this is a good indicator for identifying two-way conditionals.
The ‘else’ block is placed at the end of the conditional block, right after that
unconditional jump. Figure A.2 shows what an average if-else statement
looks like in assembly language.

                    Assembly Language Code                      High-Level Code

           cmp        [Variable1], 7                   if (SomeVariable == 7)
                                         Reversed
           jne        ElseBlock
                                                         SomeFunction();
           call       SomeFunction
                                                       else
           jmp        AfterConditionalBlock

           ElseBlock:                                    SomeOtherFunction();

           call       SomeOtherFunction

           AfterConditionalBlock:

           ...

      Figure A.2 High-level/low-level view of a two-way conditional.

         Notice the unconditional JMP right after the function call. That is where the
      first condition skips the else block and jumps to the code that follows. The
      basic pattern to look for when trying to detect a simple ‘if-else’ statement
      in a disassembled program is a condition where the code that follows it ends
      with an unconditional jump.
         Most high-level languages also support a slightly more complex version of
      a two-way conditional where a separate conditional statement is used for each
      of the two code blocks. This is usually implemented by combining the ‘if’
      and else-if keywords where each statement is used with a separate condi-
      tional statement. This way, if the first condition is not satisfied, the program
      jumps to the second condition, evaluates that one, and simply skips the entire
      conditional block if neither condition is satisfied. If one of the conditions is sat-
      isfied, the corresponding conditional block is executed, and execution just
      flows into the next program statement. Figure A.3 provides a high-level/low-
      level view of this type of control flow construct.

      Multiple-Alternative Conditionals
      Sometimes programmers create long statements with multiple conditions,
      where each condition leads to the execution of a different code block. One way
      to implement this in high-level languages is by using a “switch” block (dis-
      cussed later), but it is also possible to do this using conventional ‘if’ state-
      ments. The reason that programmers sometimes must use ‘if’ statements is
      that they allow for more flexible conditional statements. The problem is that
      ‘switch’ blocks don’t support complex conditions, only the use of hard-
      coded constants. In contrast, a sequence of ‘else-if’ statements allows for
      any kind of complex condition on each of the blocks—it is just more flexible.
