
            Assembly Language Code                      High-Level Code

    cmp       [Variable1], 10                   if (SomeVariable < 10)
                                     Reversed
    jae       AlternateBlock
                                                 SomeFunction();
    call      SomeFunction
                                                else if (SomeVariable == 345)
    jmp       AfterIfBlock

    AlternateBlock:                              SomeOtherFunction();

    cmp       [Variable1], 345
    jne       AfterIfBlock           Reversed

    call      SomeOtherFunction

    AfterIfBlock:

    ...

Figure A.3 High-level/low-level view of a two-way conditional with two conditional
statements.

   The guidelines for identifying such blocks are very similar to the ones used
for plain two-way conditionals in the previous section. The difference here is
that the compiler adds additional “alternate blocks” that consist of one or
more logical checks, the actual conditional code block, and the final JMP that
skips to the end of the entire block. Of course, the JMP only gets executed if the
condition is satisfied. Unlike ‘switch’ blocks where several conditions can
lead to the same code block, with these kinds of ‘else-if’ blocks each con-
dition is linked to just one code block. Figure A.4 demonstrates a four-way
conditional sequence with one ‘if’ and three alternate ‘else-if’ paths
that follow.

Compound Conditionals
In real-life, programs often use conditional statements that are based on more
than just a single condition. It is very common to check two or more conditions
in order to decide whether to enter a conditional code block or not. This
slightly complicates things for reversers because the low-level code generated
for a combination of logical checks is not always easy to decipher. The follow-
ing sections demonstrate typical compound conditionals and how they are
deciphered. I will begin by briefly discussing the most common logical opera-
tors used for constructing compound conditionals and proceed to demon-
strate several different compound conditionals from both the low-level and
the high-level perspectives.

                     Assembly Language Code                      High-Level Code

              cmp     [Variable1], 10

              jae     AlternateBlock1         Reversed

              call    SomeFunction
              jmp     AfterIfBlock

              AlternateBlock1:
              cmp     [Variable1], 345

              jne     AlternateBlock2         Reversed
                                                         if (SomeVariable < 10)
              call    SomeOtherFunction
                                                          SomeFunction();
              jmp     AfterIfBlock

              AlternateBlock2:                           else if (SomeVariable == 345)

              cmp     [Variable1], 346                    SomeOtherFunction();
                                              Reversed
              jne     AlternateBlock3
                                                         else if (SomeVariable == 346)
              call    AnotherFunction
                                                          AnotherFunction();
              jmp     AfterIfBlock
              AlternateBlock3:                           else if (SomeVariable == 347)

              cmp     [Variable1], 347                    YetAnotherFunction();
                                              Reversed
              jne     AfterIfBlock

              call    YetAnotherFunction

              AfterIfBlock:
              …

      Figure A.4 High-level/low-level view of conditional code with multiple alternate
      execution paths.

      Logical Operators
      High-level languages have special operators that allow the use of compound con-
      ditionals in a single conditional statement. When specifying more than one con-
      dition, the code must specify how the multiple conditions are to be combined.
         The two most common operators for combining more than one logical state-
      ments are AND and OR (not to be confused with the bitwise logic operators).
         As the name implies, AND (denoted as && in C and C++) denotes that two
      statements must be satisfied for the condition to be considered true. Detecting
      such code in assembly language is usually very easy, because you will see two

consecutive conditions that conditionally branch to the same address. Here is
an example:

  cmp                       [Variable1], 100
  jne                       AfterCondition
  cmp                       [Variable2], 50
  jne                       AfterCondition
  ret
  AfterCondition:
  ...

   In this snippet, the revealing element is the fact that both conditional jumps
point to the same address in the code (AfterCondition). The idea is simple:
Check the first condition, and skip to end of the conditional block if not met. If the
first condition is met, proceed to test the second condition and again, skip to the
end of the conditional block if it is not met. The conditional code block is placed
right after the second conditional branch (so that if neither branch is taken you
immediately proceed to execute the conditional code block). Deciphering the
actual conditions is the same as in a single statement condition, meaning that
they are also reversed. In this case, testing that Variable1 doesn’t equal 100
means that the original code checked whether Variable1 equals 100. Based on
this information you can reconstruct the source code for this snippet:

  if (Variable1 == 100 && Variable2 == 50)
                                                                             return;

  Figure A.5 demonstrates how the above high-level code maps to the assem-
bly language code presented earlier.

            Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

     cmp     [Variable1], 100                   if (Variable1 == 100 &&
     jne     AfterCondition                       Variable2 == 50)
     cmp     [Variable2], 50                      return;
     jne     AfterCondition                     ...
     ret
  AfterCondition:
     ...

Figure A.5 High-level/low-level view of a compound conditional statement with two
conditions combined using the AND operator.

         Another common logical operator is the OR operator, which is used for cre-
      ating conditional statements that only require for one of the conditions speci-
      fied to be satisfied. The OR operator means that the conditional statement is
      considered to be satisfied if either the first condition or the second condition is
      true. In C and C++, OR operators are denoted using the || symbol. Detecting
      conditional statements containing OR operators while reversing is slightly
      more complicated than detecting AND operators. The straightforward
      approach for implementing the OR operator is to use a conditional jump for
      each condition (without reversing the conditions) and add a final jump that
      skips the conditional code block if neither conditions are met. Here is an exam-
      ple of this strategy:

        cmp                           [Variable1], 100
        je                            ConditionalBlock
        cmp                           [Variable2], 50
        je                            ConditionalBlock
        jmp                           AfterConditionalBlock
        ConditionalBlock:
        call     SomeFunction
        AfterConditionalBlock:
        ...

        Figure A.6 demonstrates how the preceding snippet maps into the original
      source code.

                 Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

           cmp   [Variable1], 100                    if (Variable1 == 100 ||
           je ConditionalBlock                          Variable2 == 50)
           cmp   [Variable2], 50                        SomeFunction();
           je ConditionalBlock                       ...
           jmp   AfterConditionalBlock
        ConditionalBlock:
           call SomeFunction
        AfterConditionalBlock:
           ...

      Figure A.6 High-level/low-level view of a compound conditional statement with two
      conditions combined using the OR operator.

   Again, the most noticeable element in this snippet is the sequence of condi-
tional jumps all pointing to the same code. Keep in mind that with this
approach the conditional jumps actually point to the conditional block (as
opposed to the previous cases that have been discussed, where conditional
jumps point to the code that follows the conditional blocks). This approach is
employed by GCC and several other compilers and has the advantage (at least
from a reversing perspective) of being fairly readable and intuitive. It does
have a minor performance disadvantage because of that final JMP that’s
reached when neither condition is met.
   Other optimizing compilers such as the Microsoft compilers get around this
problem of having an extra JMP by employing a slightly different approach for
implementing the OR operator. The idea is that only the second condition is
reversed and is pointed at the code after the conditional block, while the first
condition still points to the conditional block itself. Figure A.7 illustrates what
the same logic looks like when compiled using this approach.
   The first condition checks whether Variable1 equals 100, just as it’s stated
in the source code. The second condition has been reversed and is now check-
ing whether Variable2 doesn’t equal 50. This is so because you want the first
condition to jump to the conditional code if the condition is met and the sec-
ond condition to not jump if the (reversed) condition is met. The second con-
dition skips the conditional block when it is not met.

             Assembly Language Code                    High-Level Code

     cmp     [Variable1], 100                  if (Variable1 == 100 ||
     je      ConditionalBlock                    Variable2 == 50)
     cmp     [Variable2], 50                     Result = 1;
     jne     AfterConditionalBlock             ...
   ConditionalBlock:
     mov     [Result], 1

   AfterConditionalBlock:
     ...

Figure A.7 High-level/low-level view of a conditional statement with two conditions
combined using a more efficient version of the OR operator.

      Simple Combinations
      What happens when any of the logical operators are used to specify more than
      two conditions? Usually it is just a straightforward extension of the strategy
      employed for two conditions. For GCC this simply means another condition
      before the unconditional jump.
         In the snippet shown in Figure A.8, Variable1 and Variable2 are com-
      pared against the same values as in the original sample, except that here we
      also have Variable3 which is compared against 0. As long as all conditions
      are connected using an OR operator, the compiler will simply add extra condi-
      tional jumps that go to the conditional block. Again, the compiler will always
      place an unconditional jump right after the final conditional branch instruc-
      tion. This unconditional jump will skip the conditional block and go directly to
      the code that follows it if none of the conditions are satisfied.
         With the more optimized technique, the approach is the same, except that
      instead of using an unconditional jump, the last condition is reversed. The rest
      of the conditions are implemented as straight conditional jumps that point to
      the conditional code block. Figure A.9 shows what happens when the same
      code sample from Figure A.8 is compiled using the second technique.

                  Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

           cmp      [Variable1], 100                    if (Variable1 == 100 ||
           je       ConditionalBlock                          Variable2 == 50 ||
           cmp      [Variable2], 50                           Variable3 != 0)
           je       ConditionalBlock                      SomeFunction();
           cmp      [Variable3], 0                      ...
           jne      ConditionalBlock
           jmp      AfterConditionalBlock
        ConditionalBlock:
           call     SomeFunction
        AfterConditionalBlock:
           …

      Figure A.8 High-level/low-level view of a compound conditional statement with three
      conditions combined using the OR operator.

           Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

    cmp   [Variable1], 100                     if (Variable1 == 100 ||
                                      Not
                                    Reversed
    je    ConditionalBlock                           Variable2 == 50 ||
    cmp   [Variable2], 50             Not
                                                     Variable3 != 0)
                                    Reversed
    je    ConditionalBlock                      SomeFunction();
    cmp   [Variable3], 0            Reversed   ...
    je    AfterConditionalBlock
  ConditionalBlock:
    call SomeFunction
  AfterConditionalBlock:
    ...

Figure A.9 High-level/low-level view of a conditional statement with three conditions
combined using a more efficient version of the OR operator.

   The idea is simple. When multiple OR operators are used, the compiler will
produce multiple consecutive conditional jumps that each go to the condi-
tional block if they are satisfied. The last condition will be reversed and will
jump to the code right after the conditional block so that if the condition is met
the jump won’t occur and execution will proceed to the conditional block that
resides right after that last conditional jump. In the preceding sample, the final
check checks that Variable3 doesn’t equal zero, which is why it uses JE.
   Let’s now take a look at what happens when more than two conditions are
combined using the AND operator (see Figure A.10). In this case, the compiler
simply adds more and more reversed conditions that skip the conditional
block if satisfied (keep in mind that the conditions are reversed) and continue
to the next condition (or to the conditional block itself) if not satisfied.

Complex Combinations
High-level programming languages allow programmers to combine any num-
ber of conditions using the logical operators. This means that programmers
can create complex combinations of conditional statements all combined using
the logical operators.

                 Assembly Language Code                       High-Level Code

          cmp      [Variable1], 100 Reversed         if (Variable1 == 100 &&
          jne      AfterConditionalBlock                   Variable2 == 50 &&
          cmp      [Variable2], 50        Reversed         Variable3 != 0)
          jne      AfterConditionalBlock              Result = 1;
          cmp      [Variable3], 0         Reversed   ...
          je       AfterConditionalBlock
          mov      [Result], 1
        AfterConditionalBlock:
          ...

      Figure A.10 High-level/low-level view of a compound conditional statement with three
      conditions combined using the AND operator.

         There are quite a few different combinations that programmers could use,
      and I could never possibly cover every one of those combinations. Instead,
      let’s take a quick look at one combination and try and determine the general
      rules for properly deciphering these kinds of statements.

        cmp                                                             [Variable1], 100
        je                                                              ConditionalBlock
        cmp                                                              [Variable2], 50
        jne                                                        AfterConditionalBlock
        cmp                                                               [Variable3], 0
        je                                                         AfterConditionalBlock
        ConditionalBlock:
        call                                                                    SomeFunction
        AfterConditionalBlock:
        ...

         This sample is identical to the previous sample of an optimized application
      of the OR logical operator, except that an additional condition has been added
      to test whether Variable3 equals zero. If it is, the conditional code block is
      not executed. The following C code is a high-level representation of the pre-
      ceding assembly language snippet.

        if (Variable1 == 100 || (Variable2 == 50 && Variable3 != 0))
        SomeFunction();

   It is not easy to define truly generic rules for reading compound condition-
als in assembly language, but the basic parameter to look for is the jump target
address of each one of the conditional branches. Conditions combined using
the OR operator will usually jump directly to the conditional code block, and
their conditions will not be reversed (except for the last condition, which will
point to the code that follows the conditional block and will be reversed). In
contrast, conditions combined using the AND operator will tend to be
reversed and jump to the code block that follows the conditional code block.
When analyzing complex compound conditionals, you must simply use these
basic rules to try and figure out each condition and see how the conditions are
connected.

n-way Conditional (Switch Blocks)
Switch blocks (or n-way conditionals) are commonly used when different behavior
is required for different values all coming from the same operand. Switch blocks
essentially let programmers create tables of possible values and responses. Note
that usually a single response can be used for more than one value.
   Compilers have several methods for dealing with switch blocks, depending
on how large they are and what range of values they accept. The following sec-
tions demonstrate the two most common implementations of n-way condi-
tionals: the table implementation and the tree implementation.

Table Implementation
The most efficient approach (from a runtime performance standpoint) for
large switch blocks is to generate a pointer table. The idea is to compile each of
the code blocks in the switch statement, and to record the pointers to each
one of those code blocks in a table. Later, when the switch block is executed,
the operand on which the switch block operates is used as an index into that
pointer table, and the processor simply jumps to the correct code block. Note
that this is not a function call, but rather an unconditional jump that goes
through a pointer table.
   The pointer tables are usually placed right after the function that contains the
switch block, but that’s not always the case—it depends on the specific com-
piler used. When a function table is placed in the middle of the code section,
you pretty much know for a fact that it is a ‘switch’ block pointer table.
Hard-coded pointer tables within the code section aren’t really a common sight.
   Figure A.11 demonstrates how an n-way conditional is implemented using
a table. The first case constant in the source code is 1 and the last is 5, so there
are essentially five different case blocks to be supported in the table. The
default block is not implemented as part of the table because there is no spe-
cific value that triggers it—any value that’s not within the 1–5 range will make

      the program jump to the default block. To efficiently implement the table
      lookup, the compiler subtracts 1 from ByteValue and compares it to 4. If
      ByteValue is above 4, the compiler unconditionally jumps to the default
      case. Otherwise, the compiler proceeds directly to the unconditional JMP that
      calls the specific conditional block. This JMP is the unique thing about table-
      based n-way conditionals, and it really makes it easy to identify them while
      reversing. Instead of using an immediate, hard-coded address like pretty
      much every other unconditional jump you’ll run into, this type of JMP uses a
      dynamically calculated memory address (usually bracketed in the disassem-
      bly) to obtain the target address (this is essentially the table lookup operation).
         When you look at the code for each conditional block, notice how each of the
      conditional cases ends with an unconditional JMP that jumps back to the code
      that follows the switch block. One exception is case #3, which doesn’t termi-
      nate with a break instruction. This means that when this case is executed, exe-
      cution will flow directly into case 4. This works smoothly in the table
      implementation because the compiler places the individual cases sequentially
      into memory. The code for case number 4 is always positioned right after case
      3, so the compiler simply avoids the unconditional JMP.

      Tree Implementation
      When conditions aren’t right for applying the table implementation for switch
      blocks, the compiler implements a binary tree search strategy to reach the
      desired item as quickly as possible. Binary tree searches are a common concept
      in computer science.

        VALUE RANGES WITH TABLE-BASED N-WAY CONDITIONALS

        Usually when you encounter a switch block that is entirely implemented as a
        single jump table, you can safely assume that there were only very small
        numeric gaps, if any, between the individual case constants in the source code.
        If there had been many large numeric gaps, a table implementation would be
        very wasteful, because the table would have to be very large and would contain
        large unused regions within it. However, it is sometimes possible for compilers
        to create more than one table for a single switch block and to have each table
        contain the addresses for one group of closely valued constants. This can be
        reasonably efficient assuming that there aren’t too many large gaps between
        the individual constants.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Assembly Code Generated For Switch
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Block

                                                                                                                                                                              movzx       eax, BYTE PTR [ByteValue]
                                                                                                                                                                              add         eax, -1
                                                                                                                                                                              cmp         ecx, 4
                                                                                                                                                                              ja          DefaultCase_Code
                                                                                                                                                                              jmp         DWORD PTR [PointerTableAddr + ecx * 4]
                                                                                                                                                                              AfterSwitchBlock:
                                                                                                                                                                              ...

                                                                                                                                               Original Source Code
                                                                                                                                                                            Assembly Code Generated for             Pointer Table
                                                                                                                                                                                 Individual Cases                 (PointerTableAddr)
                                                                                                                                        Switch (ByteValue)
                                                                                                                                        {                                      Case1_Code:
                                                                                                                                              case 1:                          Case Specific Code...               Case1_Code
                                                                                                                                                                               jmp    AfterSwitchBlock
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...
                                                                                                                                                    break;

so forth until you reach the correct item.
                                                                                                                                              case 2:                          Case2_Code:
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...      Case Specific Code...               Case2_Code
                                                                                                                                                    break;                     jmp    AfterSwitchBlock
                                                                                                                                              case 3:
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...

                                                                                Figure A.11 A table implementation of a switch block.
                                                                                                                                                                               Case3_Code:
                                                                                                                                              case 4:                                                              Case3_Code
                                                                                                                                                                               Case Specific Code...
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...
                                                                                                                                                    break;
                                                                                                                                              case 5:
                                                                                                                                                                               Case4_Code:
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...      Case Specific Code...               Case4_Code
                                                                                                                                                    break;                     jmp    AfterSwitchBlock
                                                                                                                                              default:
                                                                                                                                                    Case Specific Code...
                                                                                                                                                                               Case5_Code:
                                                                                                                                                    break;                     Case Specific Code...               Case5_Code
                                                                                                                                        };                                     jmp    AfterSwitchBlock

                                                                                                                                                                               DefaultCase_Code:
                                                                                                                                                                               Case Specific Code...
                                                                                                                                                                               jmp    AfterSwitchBlock

group. The process is then repeated for each of the smaller groups until the

that group and determine which subgroup contains your item, and so on and
individual items are reached. While searching you start with the two large

that it would contain your item). You then check the internal division within
groups and check which one contains the correct range of values (indicating
groups based on their values and record the range of values contained in each
  The general idea is to divide the searchable items into two equally sized
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Deciphering Code Structures

         To implement a binary search for switch blocks, the compiler must inter-
      nally represent the switch block as a tree. The idea is that instead of comparing
      the provided value against each one of the possible cases in runtime, the com-
      piler generates code that first checks whether the provided value is within the
      first or second group. The compiler then jumps to another code section that
      checks the value against the values accepted within the smaller subgroup. This
      process continues until the correct item is found or until the conditional block
      is exited (if no case block is found for the value being searched).
         Let’s take a look at a common switch block implemented in C and observe
      how it is transformed into a tree by the compiler.

        switch (Value)
        {
             case 120:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 140:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 501:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 1001:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 1100:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 1400:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 2000:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 3400:
                    Code...
                    break;
             case 4100:
                    Code...
                    break;
        };
                                                                                                                             Beginning

                                                                                                                    cmp   eax,1100
                                                                                                                    jg    Above1100
                                                                                                                    Proceed to 1100_Or_Below

                                                                                                             1100_Or_Below

                                                                                                      Cmp   eax, 1100
                                                                                                      je    Case_1100
                                                                                                      cmp   eax, 501
                                                                                                                                                                             implements each tree node.

                                                                                                      jg    Case_1001
                                                                                                      Proceed to 501_Or_Below

                                                                                             501_Or_Below
                                                                                                                                                     Above1100
                                                                                        cmp   eax, 501
                                                                                        je    Case_501                                          cmp   eax, 3400
                                                                                        sub   eax, 120                                          jg    Case_4100
                                                                                        je    Case_120                                          je    Case_3400
                                                                                        sub   eax, 20                                           cmp   eax, 1400
                                                                                        jne   AfterSwBlock                                      je    Case_1400
                                                                                        Case120:                        Case         Case       cmp   eax, 2000
                                                                                        ...                             1001         1100       jne   AfterSwBlock
                                                                                                                                                Case_2000:
                                                                                                                                                ...

                                                                                      Case     Case        Case
                                                                                      120      140         501
                                                                                                                                         Case        Case      Case   Case
                                                                                                                                         1400        2000      3400   4100

Figure A.12 Tree-implementation of a switch block including assembly language code.
                                                                                                                                                                                Figure A.12 demonstrates how the preceding switch block can be viewed as
                                                                                                                                                                             a tree by the compiler and presents the compiler-generated assembly code that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Deciphering Code Structures

         One relatively unusual quality of tree-based n-way conditionals that makes
      them a bit easier to make out while reading disassembled code is the numer-
      ous subtractions often performed on a single register. These subtractions are
      usually followed by conditional jumps that lead to the specific case blocks (this
      layout can be clearly seen in the 501_Or_Below case in Figure A.12). The com-
      piler typically starts with the original value passed to the conditional block
      and gradually subtracts certain values from it (these are usually the case block
      values), constantly checking if the result is zero. This is simply an efficient way
      to determine which case block to jump into using the smallest possible code.

      Loops
      When you think about it, a loop is merely a chunk of conditional code just like
      the ones discussed earlier, with the difference that it is repeatedly executed,
      usually until the condition is no longer satisfied. Loops typically (but not
      always) include a counter of some sort that is used to control the number of
      iterations left to go before the loop is terminated. Fundamentally, loops in any
      high-level language can be divided into two categories, pretested loops, which
      contain logic followed by the loop’s body (that’s the code that will be repeat-
      edly executed) and posttested loops, which contain the loop body followed by
      the logic.
         Let’s take a look at the various types of loops and examine how they are rep-
      resented in assembly language,

      Pretested Loops
      Pretested loops are probably the most popular loop construct, even though
      they are slightly less efficient compared to posttested ones. The problem is that
      to represent a pretested loop the assembly language code must contain two
      jump instructions: a conditional branch instruction in the beginning (that will
      terminate the loop when the condition is no longer satisfied) and an uncondi-
      tional jump at the end that jumps back to the beginning of the loop. Let’s take a
      look at a simple pretested loop and see how it is implemented by the compiler:

        c = 0;
        while (c < 1000)
        {
            array[c] = c;
            c++;
        }

        You can easily see that this is a pretested loop, because the loop first checks
      that c is lower than 1,000 and then performs the loop’s body. Here is the assem-
      bly language code most compilers would generate from the preceding code:

  mov            ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
  xor            eax, eax
  LoopStart:
  mov            DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
  add            eax, 1
  cmp            eax, 1000
  jl             LoopStart

   It appears that even though the condition in the source code was located
before the loop, the compiler saw fit to relocate it. The reason that this happens
is that testing the counter after the loop provides a (relatively minor) perfor-
mance improvement. As I’ve explained, converting this loop to a posttested
one means that the compiler can eliminate the unconditional JMP instruction
at the end of the loop.
   There is one potential risk with this implementation. What happens if the
counter starts out at an out-of-bounds value? That could cause problems
because the loop body uses the loop counter for accessing an array. The pro-
grammer was expecting that the counter be tested before running the loop
body, not after! The reason that this is not a problem in this particular case is
that the counter is explicitly initialized to zero before the loop starts, so the
compiler knows that it is zero and that there’s nothing to check. If the counter
were to come from an unknown source (as a parameter passed from some
other, unknown function for instance), the compiler would probably place the
logic where it belongs: in the beginning of the sequence.
   Let’s try this out by changing the above C loop to take the value of counter
c from an external source, and recompile this sequence. The following is the
output from the Microsoft compiler in this case:

  mov            eax, DWORD PTR [c]
  mov            ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
  cmp            eax, 1000
  jge            EndOfLoop
  LoopStart:
  mov            DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
  add            eax, 1
  cmp            eax, 1000
  jl             LoopStart
  EndOfLoop:

   It seems that even in this case the compiler is intent on avoiding the two
jumps. Instead of moving the comparison to the beginning of the loop and
adding an unconditional jump at the end, the compiler leaves everything as it
is and simply adds another condition at the beginning of the loop. This initial
check (which only gets executed once) will make sure that the loop is not
entered if the counter has an illegal value. The rest of the loop remains the same.

        For the purpose of this particular discussion a for loop is equivalent to a
        pretested loop such as the ones discussed earlier.

      Posttested Loops
      So what kind of an effect do posttested loops implemented in the high-level
      realm actually have on the resulting assembly language code if the compiler
      produces posttested sequences anyway? Unsurprisingly—very little.
         When a program contains a do...while() loop, the compiler generates a
      very similar sequence to the one in the previous section. The only difference is
      that with do...while() loops the compiler never has to worry about
      whether the loop’s conditional statement is expected to be satisfied or not in
      the first run. It is placed at the end of the loop anyway, so it must be tested any-
      way. Unlike the previous case where changing the starting value of the counter
      to an unknown value made the compiler add another check before the begin-
      ning of the loop, with do...while() it just isn’t necessary. This means that
      with posttested loops the logic is always placed after the loop’s body, the same
      way it’s arranged in the source code.

      Loop Break Conditions
      A loop break condition occurs when code inside the loop’s body terminates the
      loop (in C and C++ this is done using the break keyword). The break key-
      word simply interrupts the loop and jumps to the code that follows. The fol-
      lowing assembly code is the same loop you’ve looked at before with a
      conditional break statement added to it:

        mov             eax, DWORD PTR [c]
        mov             ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
        LoopStart:
        cmp             DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], 0
        jne             AfterLoop
        mov             DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
        add             eax, 1
        cmp             eax, 1000
        jl              LoopStart
        AfterLoop:

        This code is slightly different from the one in the previous examples because
      even though the counter originates in an unknown source the condition is only
      checked at the end of the loop. This is indicative of a posttested loop. Also, a
      new check has been added that checks the current array item before it is

initialized and jumps to AfterLoop if it is nonzero. This is your break
 statement—simply an elegant name for the good old goto command that was
so popular in “lesser” programming languages.
   For this you can easily deduce the original source to be somewhat similar to
the following:
  do
  {
       if (array[c])
           break;

      array[c] = c;
      c++;
  } while (c < 1000);

Loop Skip-Cycle Statements
A loop skip-cycle statement is implemented in C and C++ using the con-
tinue keyword. The statement skips the current iteration of the loop and
jumps straight to the loop’s conditional statement, which decides whether to
perform another iteration or just exit the loop. Depending on the specific type
of the loop, the counter (if one is used) is usually not incremented because the
code that increments it is skipped along with the rest of the loop’s body. This
is one place where for loops differ from while loops. In for loops, the code
that increments the counter is considered part of the loop’s logical statement,
which is why continue doesn’t skip the counter increment in such loops.
Let’s take a look at a compiler-generated assembly language snippet for a loop
that has a skip-cycle statement in it:

  mov            eax, DWORD PTR [c]
  mov            ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
  LoopStart:
  cmp            DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], 0
  jne            NextCycle
  mov            DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
  add            eax, 1
  NextCycle:
  cmp            eax, 1000
  jl             SHORT LoopStart

  This code sample is the same loop you’ve been looking at except that the
condition now invokes the continue command instead of the break com-
mand. Notice how the condition jumps to NextCycle and skips the incre-
menting of the counter. The program then checks the counter’s value and
jumps back to the beginning of the loop if the counter is lower than 1,000.

        Here is the same code with a slight modification:

        mov           eax, DWORD PTR [c]
        mov           ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
        LoopStart:
        cmp           DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], 0
        jne           NextCycle
        mov           DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
        NextCycle:
        add           eax, 1
        cmp           eax, 1000
        jl            SHORT LoopStart

         The only difference here is that NextCycle is now placed earlier, before the
      counter-incrementing code. This means that unlike before, the continue
      statement will increment the counter and run the loop’s logic. This indicates
      that the loop was probably implemented using the for keyword. Another
      way of implementing this type of sequence without using a for loop is by
      using a while or do...while loop and incrementing the counter inside the
      conditional statement, using the ++ operator. In this case, the logical statement
      would look like this:

        do { ... } while (++c < 1000);

      Loop Unrolling
      Loop unrolling is a code-shaping level optimization that is not CPU- or
      instruction-set-specific, which means that it is essentially a restructuring of the
      high-level code aimed at producing more efficient machine code. The follow-
      ing is an assembly language example of a partially unrolled loop:

        xor          ecx,ecx
        pop          ebx
        lea          ecx,[ecx]
        LoopStart:
        mov          edx,dword ptr [esp+ecx*4+8]
        add          edx,dword ptr [esp+ecx*4+4]
        add          ecx,3
        add          edx,dword ptr [esp+ecx*4-0Ch]
        add          eax,edx
        cmp          ecx,3E7h
        jl           LoopStart

         This loop is clearly a partially unrolled loop, and the best indicator that this
      is the case is the fact that the counter is incremented by three in each iteration.
      Essentially what the compiler has done is it duplicated the loop’s body three

times, so that each iteration actually performs the work of three iterations
instead of one. The counter incrementing code has been corrected to increment
by 3 instead of 1 in each iteration. This is more efficient because the loop’s
overhead is greatly reduced—instead of executing the CMP and JL instructions
0x3e7 (999) times, they will only be executed 0x14d (333) times.
   A more aggressive type of loop unrolling is to simply eliminate the loop
altogether and actually duplicate its body as many times as needed. Depend-
ing on the number of iterations (and assuming that number is known in
advance), this may or may not be a practical approach.

Branchless Logic
Some optimizing compilers have special optimization techniques for generat-
ing branchless logic. The main goal behind all of these techniques is to eliminate
or at least reduce the number of conditional jumps required for implementing
a given logical statement. The reasons for wanting to reduce the number of
jumps in the code to the absolute minimum is explained in the section titled
“Hardware Execution Environments in Modern Processors” in Chapter 2.
Briefly, the use of a processor pipeline dictates that when the processor
encounters a conditional jump, it must guess or predict whether the jump will
take place or not, and based on that guess decide which instructions to add to
the end of the pipeline—the ones that immediately follow the branch or the
ones at the jump’s target address. If it guesses wrong, the entire pipeline is
emptied and must be refilled. The amount of time wasted in these situations
heavily depends on the processor’s internal design and primarily on its
pipeline length, but in most pipelined CPUs refilling the pipeline is a highly
expensive operation.
   Some compilers implement special optimizations that use sophisticated
arithmetic and conditional instructions to eliminate or reduce the number of
jumps required in order to implement logic. These optimizations are usually
applied to code that conditionally performs one or more arithmetic or assign-
ment operations on operands. The idea is to convert the two or more condi-
tional execution paths into a single sequence of arithmetic operations that
result in the same data, but without the need for conditional jumps.
   There are two major types of branchless logic code emitted by popular com-
pilers. One is based on converting logic into a purely arithmetic sequence that
provides the same end result as the original high-level language logic. This
technique is very limited and can only be applied to relatively simple
sequences. For slightly more involved logical statements, compilers some-
times employ special conditional instructions (when available on the target
CPU). The two primary approaches for implementing branchless logic are dis-
cussed in the following sections.

      Pure Arithmetic Implementations
      Certain logical statements can be converted directly into a series of arithmetic
      operations, involving no conditional execution whatsoever. These are elegant
      mathematical tricks that allow compilers to translate branched logic in the
      source code into a simple sequence of arithmetic operations. Consider the fol-
      lowing code:

        mov       eax, [ebp - 10]
        and       eax, 0x00001000
        neg       eax
        sbb       eax, eax
        neg       eax
        ret

         The preceding compiler-generated code snippet is quite common in IA-32
      programs, and many reversers have a hard time deciphering its meaning. Con-
      sidering the popularity of these sequences, you should go over this sample
      and make sure you understand how it works.
         The code starts out with a simple logical AND of a local variable with
      0x00001000, storing the result into EAX (the AND instruction always sends
      the result to the first, left-hand operand). You then proceed to a NEG instruc-
      tion, which is slightly less common. NEG is a simple negation instruction,
      which reverses the sign of the operand—this is sometimes called two’s com-
      plement. Mathematically, NEG performs a simple

        Result = -(Operand);

      operation. The interesting part of this sequence is the SBB instruction. SBB is a
      subtraction with borrow instruction. This means that SBB takes the second
      (right-hand) operand and adds the value of CF to it and then subtracts the
      result from the first operand. Here’s a pseudocode for SBB:

        Operand1 = Operand1 – (Operand2 + CF);

         Notice that in the preceding sample SBB was used on a single operand. This
      means that SBB will essentially subtract EAX from itself, which of course is a
      mathematically meaningless operation if you disregard CF. Because CF is
      added to the second operand, the result will depend solely on the value of CF.
      If CF == 1, EAX will become –1. If CF == 0, EAX will become zero. It should
      be obvious that the value of EAX after the first NEG was irrelevant. It is immedi-
      ately lost in the following SBB because it subtracts EAX from itself. This raises
      the question of why did the compiler even bother with the NEG instruction?
         The Intel documentation states that beyond reversing the operand’s sign,
      NEG will also set the value of CF based on the value of the operand. If the
      operand is zero when NEG is executed, CF will be set to zero. If the operand is

nonzero, CF will be set to one. It appears that some compilers like to use this
additional functionality provided by NEG as a clever way to check whether an
operand contains a zero or nonzero value. Let’s quickly go over each step in
this sequence:
  ■■   Use NEG to check whether the source operand is zero or nonzero. The
       result is stored in CF.
  ■■   Use SBB to transfer the result from CF back to a usable register. Of
       course, because of the nature of SBB, a nonzero value in CF will become
       –1 rather than 1. Whether that’s a problem or not depends on the nature
       of the high-level language. Some languages use 1 to denote True, while
       others use –1.
  ■■   Because the code in the sample came from a C/C++ compiler, which
       uses 1 to denote True, an additional NEG is required, except that this
       time NEG is actually employed for reversing the operand’s sign. If the
       operand is –1, it will become 1. If it’s zero it will of course remain zero.
  The following is a pseudocode that will help clarify the steps described
previously:

  EAX = EAX & 0x00001000;
  if (EAX)
           CF = 1;
  else
           CF = 0;

  EAX = EAX – (EAX + CF);
  EAX = -EAX;

   Essentially, what this sequence does is check for a particular bit in EAX
(0x00001000), and returns 1 if it is set or zero if it isn’t. It is quite elegant in
the sense that it is purely arithmetic—there are no conditional branch instruc-
tions involved. Let’s quickly translate this sequence back into a high-level C
representation:

  if (LocalVariable & 0x00001000)
                                                                       return TRUE;
  else
  return FALSE;

  That’s much more readable, isn’t it? Still, as reversers we’re often forced to
work with such less readable, unattractive code sequences as the one just dis-
sected. Knowing and understanding these types of low-level tricks is very
helpful because they are very frequently used in compiler-generated code.
  Let’s take a look at another, slightly more involved, example of how high-
level logical constructs can be implemented using pure arithmetic:

        call       SomeFunc
        sub        eax, 4
        neg        eax
        sbb        eax, eax
        and        al, -52
        add        eax, 54
        ret

         You’ll notice that this sequence also uses the NEG/SBB combination, except
      that this one has somewhat more complex functionality. The sequence starts
      by calling a function and subtracting 4 from its return value. It then invokes
      NEG and SBB in order to perform a zero test on the result, just as you saw in the
      previous example. If after the subtraction the return value from SomeFunc is
      zero, SBB will set EAX to zero. If the subtracted return value is nonzero, SBB
      will set EAX to –1 (or 0xffffffff in hexadecimal).
         The next two instructions are the clever part of this sequence. Let’s start by
      looking at that AND instruction. Because SBB is going to set EAX either to zero
      or to 0xffffffff, we can consider the following AND instruction to be simi-
      lar to a conditional assignment instruction (much like the CMOV instruction
      discussed later). By ANDing EAX with a constant, the code is essentially saying:
      “if the result from SBB is zero, do nothing. If the result is –1, set EAX to the
      specified constant.” After doing this, the code unconditionally adds 54 to EAX
      and returns to the caller.
         The challenge at this point is to try and figure out what this all means. This
      sequence is obviously performing some kind of transformation on the return
      value of SomeFunc and returning that transformed value to the caller. Let’s try
      and analyze the bottom line of this sequence. It looks like the return value is
      going to be one of two values: If the outcome of SBB is zero (which means that
      SomeFunc’s return value was 4), EAX will be set to 54. If SBB produces
      0xffffffff, EAX will be set to 2, because the AND instruction will set it to –52,
      and the ADD instruction will bring the value up to 2.
         This is a sequence that compares a pair of integers, and produces (without
      the use of any branches) one value if the two integers are equal and another
      value if they are unequal. The following is a C version of the assembly lan-
      guage snippet from earlier:

        if (SomeFunc() == 4)
             return 54;
        else
             return 2;

Predicated Execution
Using arithmetic sequences to implement branchless logic is a very limited
technique. For more elaborate branchless logic, compilers employ conditional
instructions (provided that such instructions are available on the target CPU
architecture). The idea behind conditional instructions is that instead of hav-
ing to branch to two different code sections, compilers can sometimes use spe-
cial instructions that are only executed if certain conditions exist. If the
conditions aren’t met, the processor will simply ignore the instruction and
move on. The IA-32 instruction set does not provide a generic conditional exe-
cution prefix that applies to all instructions. To conditionally perform opera-
tions, specific instructions are available that operate conditionally.

  Certain CPU architectures such as Intel’s IA-64 64-bit architecture actually allow
  almost any instruction in the instruction set to execute conditionally. In IA-64
  (also known as Itanium2) this is implemented using a set of 64 available
  predicate registers that each store a Boolean specifying whether a particular
  condition is True or False. Instructions can be prefixed with the name of one of
  the predicate registers, and the CPU will only execute the instruction if the
  register equals True. If not, the CPU will treat the instruction as a NOP.

  The following sections describe the two IA-32 instruction groups that enable
branchless logic implementations under IA-32 processor.

Set Byte on Condition (SETcc)
SETcc is a set of instructions that perform the same logical flag tests as the
conditional jump instructions (Jcc), except that instead of performing a jump,
the logic test is performed, and the result is stored in an operand. Here’s a
quick example of how this is used in actual code. Suppose that a programmer
writes the following line:

  return (result != FALSE);

  In case you’re not entirely comfortable with C language semantics, the only
difference between this and the following line:

  return result;

is that in the first version the function will always return a Boolean. If result
equals zero it will return one. If not, it will return zero, regardless of what
value result contains. In the second example, the return value will be what-
ever is stored in result.

        Without branchless logic, a compiler would have to generate the following
      code or something very similar to it:

        cmp            [result], 0
        jne            NotEquals
        mov            eax, 0
        ret
        NotEquals:
        mov            eax, 1
        ret

        Using the SETcc instruction, compilers can generate branchless logic. In
      this particular example, the SETNE instruction would be employed in the same
      way as the JE instruction was employed in the previous example:

        xor   eax, eax          // Make sure EAX is all zeros
        cmp   [result], 0
        setne                   al
        ret

         The use of the SETNE instruction in this context provides an elegant solu-
      tion. If result == 0, EAX will be set to zero. If not, it will be set to one. Of
      course, like Jcc, the specific condition in each of the SETcc instructions is
      based on the conditional codes described earlier in this chapter.

      Conditional Move (CMOVcc)
      The CMOVcc instruction is another predicated execution feature in the IA-32
      instruction set. It conditionally copies data from the second operand to the
      first. The specific condition that is checked depends on the specific conditional
      code used. Just like SETcc, CMOVcc also has multiple versions—one for each
      of the conditional codes described earlier in this chapter. The following code
      demonstrates a simple use of the CMOVcc instruction:

        mov
        ecx, 2000
        cmp
        edx, 0
        mov
        eax, 1000
        cmove
        eax, ecx
        ret

         The preceding code (generated by the Intel C/C++ compiler) demonstrates
      an elegant use of the CMOVcc instruction. The idea is that EAX must receive one
      of two different values depending on the value of EDX. The implementation

  CMOV IN MODERN COMPILERS

  CMOV is a pretty unusual sight when reversing an average compiler-generated
  program. The reason is probably that CMOV was not available in the earlier
  crops of IA-32 processors and was first introduced in the Pentium Pro
  processor. Because of this, most compilers don’t seem to use this instruction,
  probably to avoid backward-compatibility issues. The interesting thing is that
  even if they are specifically configured to generate code for the more modern
  CPUs some compilers still don’t seem to want to use it. The two C/C++
  compilers that actually use the CMOV instruction are the Intel C++ Compiler and
  GCC (the GNU C Compiler). The latest version of the Microsoft C/C++
  Optimizing Compiler (version 13.10.3077) doesn’t seem to ever want to use
  CMOV, even when the target processor is explicitly defined as one of the newer
  generation processors.

loads one of the possible results into ECX and the other into EAX. The code
checks EDX against the conditional value (zero in this case), and uses CMOVE
(conditional move if equals) to conditionally load EDX with the value from
ECX if the values are equal. If the condition isn’t satisfied, the conditional move
won’t take place, and so EAX will retain its previous value (1,000). If the condi-
tional move does take place, EAX is loaded with 2,000. From this you can eas-
ily deduce that the source code was similar to the following code:

  if (SomeVariable == 0)
                            return 2000;
  else
                            return 1000;

Effects of Working-Set Tuning on Reversing
Working-set tuning is the process of rearranging the layout of code in an exe-
cutable by gathering the most frequently used code areas in the beginning of
the module. The idea is to delay the loading of rarely used code, so that only
frequently used portions of the program reside constantly in memory. The
benefit is a significant reduction in memory consumption and an improved
program startup speed. Working-set tuning can be applied to both programs
and to the operating system.

Function-Level Working-Set Tuning
The conventional form of working-set tuning is based on a function-level reor-
ganization. A program is launched, and the working-set tuner program

      observes which functions are executed most frequently. The program then
      reorganizes the order of functions in the binary according to that information,
      so that the most popular functions are moved to the beginning of the module,
      and the less popular functions are placed near the end. This way the operating
      system can keep the “popular code” area in memory and only load the rest of
      the module as needed (and then page it out again when it’s no longer needed).
        In most reversing scenarios function-level working-set tuning won’t have
      any impact on the reversing process, except that it provides a tiny hint regard-
      ing the program: A function’s address relative to the beginning of the module
      indicates how popular that function is. The closer a function is to the begin-
      ning of the module, the more popular it is. Functions that reside very near to
      the end of the module (those that have higher addresses) are very rarely exe-
      cuted and are probably responsible for some unusual cases such as error cases
      or rarely used functionality. Figure A.13 illustrates this concept.

      Line-Level Working-Set Tuning
      Line-level working-set tuning is a more advanced form of working-set tuning
      that usually requires explicit support in the compiler itself. The idea is that
      instead of shuffling functions based on their usage patterns, the working-set
      tuning process can actually shuffle conditional code sections within individual
      functions, so that the working set can be made even more efficient than with
      function-level tuning. The working-set tuner records usage statistics for every
      condition in the program and can actually relocate conditional code blocks to
      other areas in the binary module.
         For reversers, line-level working-set tuning provides the benefit of knowing
      whether a particular condition is likely to execute during normal runtime.
      However, not being able to see the entire function in one piece is a major has-
      sle. Because code blocks are moved around beyond the boundaries of the func-
      tions to which they belong, reversing sessions on such modules can exhibit
      some peculiarities. One important thing to pay attention to is that functions
      are broken up and scattered throughout the module, and that it’s hard to tell
      when you’re looking at a detached snippet of code that is a part of some
      unknown function at the other end of the module. The code that sits right
      before or after the snippet might be totally unrelated to it. One trick that some-
      times works for identifying the connections between such isolated code snip-
      pets is to look for an unconditional JMP at the end of the snippet. Often this
      detached snippet will jump back to the main body of the function, revealing its
      location. In other cases the detached code chunk will simply return, and its
      connection to its main function body would remain unknown. Figure A.14
      illustrates the effect of line-level working-set tuning on code placement.

                                                                      Beginning of
                                                                      Module
               Function1 (Medium Popularity)
                 Function1_Condition1 (Frequently Executed)
                 Function1_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)
                 Function1_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)

               Function2 (Low Popularity)
                 Function2_Condition1 (Rarely Executed)
                 Function2_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)
               Function3 (High Popularity)
                 Function3_Condition1 (Sometimes Executed)
                 Function3_Condition2 (Rarely Executed)
                 Function3_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)
                                                                      End of Module

                                                                      Beginning of
                                                                      Module
               Function3 (High Popularity)
                 Function3_Condition1 (Sometimes Executed)
                 Function3_Condition2 (Rarely Executed)
                 Function3_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)

               Function1 (Medium Popularity)
                 Function1_Condition1 (Frequently Executed)
                 Function1_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)
                 Function1_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)

               Function2 (Low Popularity)
                 Function2_Condition1 (Rarely Executed)
                 Function2_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)
                                                                      End of Module

Figure A.13 Effects of function-level working-set tuning on code placement in binary
executables.

                                                                      Beginning of
                                                                      Module
            Function3 (High Popularity)
              Function3_Condition1 (Relocated)
              Function3_Condition2 (Relocated)
              Function3_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)

            Function1 (Medium Popularity)
              Function1_Condition1 (Frequently Executed)
              Function1_Condition2 (Relocated)
              Function1_Condition3 (Frequently Executed)

            Function3_Condition1 (Sometimes Executed)

            Function2 (Low Popularity)
              Function2_Condition1 (Rarely Executed)
              Function2_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)

            Function3_Condition2 (Rarely Executed)
            Function1_Condition2 (Sometimes Executed)
                                                                      End of Module

      Figure A.14 The effects of line-level working-set tuning on code placement in the same
      sample binary executable.
                                                              ACPHPAEPNTDE IRX

                                                                   B
                                 Understanding
                             Compiled Arithmetic

This appendix explains the basics of how arithmetic is implemented in assem-
bly language, and demonstrates some basic arithmetic sequences and what
they look like while reversing. Arithmetic is one of the basic pillars that make
up any program, along with control flow and data management. Some arith-
metic sequences are plain and straightforward to decipher while reversing,
but in other cases they can be slightly difficult to read because of the various
compiler optimizations performed.
   This appendix opens with a description of the basic IA-32 flags used for
arithmetic and proceeds to demonstrate a variety of arithmetic sequences com-
monly found in compiler-generated IA-32 assembly language code.

Arithmetic Flags
To understand the details of how arithmetic and logic are implemented in
assembly language, you must fully understand flags and how they’re used.
Flags are used in almost every arithmetic instruction in the instruction set, and
to truly understand the meaning of arithmetic sequences in assembly lan-
guage you must understand the meanings of the individual flags and how
they are used by the arithmetic instructions.
  Flags in IA-32 processors are stored in the EFLAGS register, which is a 32-bit
register that is managed by the processor and is rarely accessed directly by

      program code. Many of the flags in EFLAGS are system flags that determine
      the current state of the processor. Other than these system flags, there are also
      eight status flags, which represent the current state of the processor, usually
      with regards to the result of the last arithmetic operation performed. The fol-
      lowing sections describe the most important status flags used in IA-32.

      The Overflow Flags (CF and OF)
      The carry flag (CF) and overflow flag (OF) are two important elements in arith-
      metical and logical assembly language. Their function and the differences
      between them aren’t immediately obvious, so here is a brief overview.
          The CF and OF are both overflow indicators, meaning that they are used to
      notify the program of any arithmetical operation that generates a result that is
      too large in order to be fully represented by the destination operand. The dif-
      ference between the two is related to the data types that the program is deal-
      ing with.
          Unlike most high-level languages, assembly language programs don’t
      explicitly specify the details of the data types they deal with. Some arithmeti-
      cal instructions such as ADD (Add) and SUB (Subtract) aren’t even aware of
      whether the operands they are working with are signed or unsigned because
      it just doesn’t matter—the binary result is the same. Other instructions, such as
      MUL (Multiply) and DIV (Divide) have different versions for signed and
      unsigned operands because multiplication and division actually produce dif-
      ferent binary outputs depending on the exact data type.
          One area where signed or unsigned representation always matters is over-
      flows. Because signed integers are one bit smaller than their equivalent-sized
      unsigned counterparts (because of the extra bit that holds the sign), overflows
      are triggered differently for signed and unsigned integers. This is where the
      carry flag and the overflow flag come into play. Instead of having separate
      signed and unsigned versions of arithmetic instructions, the problem of cor-
      rectly reporting overflows is addressed by simply having two overflow flags:
      one for signed operands and one for unsigned operands. Operations such as
      addition and subtraction are performed using the same instruction for either
      signed or unsigned operands, and such instructions set both groups of flags
      and leave it up to the following instructions to regard the relevant one.
          For example, consider the following arithmetic sample and how it affects
      the overflow flags:

        mov       ax, 0x1126         ; (4390 in decimal)
        mov       bx, 0x7200         ; (29184 in decimal)
        add       ax, bx

   The above addition will produce different results, depending on whether
the destination operand is treated as signed or unsigned. When presented in
hexadecimal form, the result is 0x8326, which is equivalent to 33574—assum-
ing that AX is considered to be an unsigned operand. If you’re treating AX as a
signed operand, you will see that an overflow has occurred. Because any
signed number that has the most significant bit set is considered negative,
0x8326 becomes –31962. It is obvious that because a signed 16-bit operand
can only represent values up to 32767, adding 4390 and 29184 would produce
an overflow, and AX would wraparound to a negative number. Therefore, from
an unsigned perspective no overflow has occurred, but if you consider the des-
tination operand to be signed, an overflow has occurred. Because of this, the
preceding code would result in OF (representing overflows in signed
operands) being set and in CF (representing overflows in unsigned operands)
being cleared.

The Zero Flag (ZF)
The zero flag is set when the result of an arithmetic operation is zero, and it is
cleared if the result is nonzero. ZF is used in quite a few different situations in
IA-32 code, but probably one of the most common uses it has is for comparing
two operands and testing whether they are equal. The CMP instruction sub-
tracts one operand from the other and sets ZF if the pseudoresult of the sub-
traction operation is zero, which indicates that the operands are equal. If the
operands are unequal, ZF is set to zero.

The Sign Flag (SF)
The sign flag receives the value of the most significant bit of the result (regard-
less of whether the result is signed or unsigned). In signed integers this is
equivalent to the integer’s sign. A value of 1 denotes a negative number in the
result, while a value of 0 denotes a positive number (or zero) in the result.

The Parity Flag (PF)
The parity flag is a (rarely used) flag that reports the binary parity of the lower
8 bits of certain arithmetic results. Binary parity means that the flag reports the
parity of the number of bits set, as opposed to the actual numeric parity of the
result. A value of 1 denotes an even number of set bits in the lower 8 bits of the
result, while a value of 0 denotes an odd number of set bits.

      Basic Integer Arithmetic
      The following section discusses the basic arithmetic operations and how they
      are implemented by compilers on IA-32 machines. I will cover optimized addi-
      tion, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulo.
         Note that with any sane compiler, any arithmetic operation involving two
      constant operands will be eliminated completely and replaced with the result
      in the assembly code. The following discussions of arithmetic optimizations
      only apply to cases where at least one of the operands is variable and is not
      known in advance.

      Addition and Subtraction
      Integers are generally added and subtracted using the ADD and SUB instruc-
      tions, which can take different types of operands: register names, immediate
      hard-coded operands, or memory addresses. The specific combination of
      operands depends on the compiler and doesn’t always reflect anything spe-
      cific about the source code, but one obvious point is that adding or subtracting
      an immediate operand usually reflects a constant that was hard-coded into the
      source code (still, in some cases compilers will add or subtract a constant from
      a register for other purposes, without being instructed to do so at the source
      code level). Note that both instructions store the result in the left-hand
      operand.
         Subtraction and addition are very simple operations that are performed
      very efficiently in modern IA-32 processors and are usually implemented in
      straightforward methods by compilers. On older implementations of IA-32 the
      LEA instruction was considered to be faster than ADD and SUB, which brought
      many compilers to use LEA for quick additions and shifts. Here is how the LEA
      instruction can be used to perform an arithmetic operation.

        lea        ecx, DWORD PTR [edx+edx]

         Notice that even though most disassemblers add the words DWORD PTR
      before the operands, LEA really can’t distinguish between a pointer and an
      integer. LEA never performs any actual memory accesses.
         Starting with Pentium 4 the situation has reversed and most compilers will
      use ADD and SUB when generating code. However, when surrounded by sev-
      eral other ADD or SUB instructions, the Intel compiler still seems to use LEA.
      This is probably because the execution unit employed by LEA is separate from
      the ones used by ADD and SUB. Using LEA makes sense when the main ALUs
      are busy—it improves the chances of achieving parallelism in runtime.

Multiplication and Division
Before beginning the discussion on multiplication and division, I will discuss
a few of the basics. First of all, keep in mind that multiplication and division
are both considered fairly complex operations in computers, far more so than
addition and subtraction. The IA-32 processors provide instructions for sev-
eral different kinds of multiplication and division, but they are both relatively
slow. Because of this, both of these operations are quite often implemented in
other ways by compilers.
   Dividing or multiplying a number by powers of 2 is a very natural operation
for a computer, because it sits very well with the binary representation of the
integers. This is just like the way that people can very easily divide and multi-
ply by powers of 10. All it takes is shifting a few zeros around. It is interesting
how computers deal with division and multiplication in much in the same
way as we do. The general strategy is to try and bring the divisor or multiplier
as close as possible to a convenient number that is easily represented by the
number system. You then perform that relatively simple calculation, and fig-
ure out how to apply the rest of the divisor or multiplier to the calculation. For
IA-32 processors, the equivalent of shifting zeros around is to perform binary
shifts using the SHL and SHR instructions. The SHL instruction shifts values to
the left, which is the equivalent of multiplying by powers of 2. The SHR
instruction shifts values to the right, which is the equivalent of dividing by
powers of 2. After shifting compilers usually use addition and subtraction to
compensate the result as needed.

Multiplication
When you are multiplying a variable by another variable, the MUL/IMUL
instruction is generally the most efficient tool you have at your disposal. Still,
most compilers will completely avoid using these instructions when the mul-
tiplier is a constant. For example, multiplying a variable by 3 is usually imple-
mented by shifting the number by 1 bit to the left and then adding the original
value to the result. This can be done either by using SHL and ADD or by using
LEA, as follows:

  lea        eax, DWORD PTR [eax+eax*2]

  In more complicated cases, compilers use a combination of LEA and ADD.
For example, take a look at the following code, which is essentially a multipli-
cation by 32:

  lea        eax, DWORD PTR [edx+edx]
  add        eax, eax
  add        eax, eax
  add        eax, eax
  add        eax, eax

        Basically, what you have here is y=x*2*2*2*2*2, which is equivalent to
      y=x*32. This code, generated by Intel’s compiler, is actually quite surprising
      when you think about it. First of all, in terms of code size it is big—one LEA and
      four ADDs are quite a bit longer than a single SHL. Second, it is surprising that
      this sequence is actually quicker than a simple SHL by 5, especially consider-
      ing that SHL is considered to be a fairly high-performance instruction. The
      explanation is that LEA and ADD are both very low-latency, high-throughput
      instructions. In fact, this entire sequence could probably execute in less than
      three clock cycles (though this depends on the specific processor and on other
      environmental aspects). In contrast, SHL has a latency of four clocks cycles,
      which is why using it is just not as efficient.
        Let’s examine another multiplication sequence:

        lea          eax, DWORD PTR [esi + esi * 2]
        sal          eax, 2
        sub          eax, esi

         This sequence, which was generated by GCC, uses LEA to multiply ESI by
      3, and then uses SAL (SAL is the same instruction as SHL—they share the same
      opcode) to further multiply by 4. These two operations multiply the operand
      by 12. The code then subtracts the operand from the result. This sequence
      essentially multiplies the operand by 11. Mathematically this can be viewed as:
      y=(x+x*2)*4-x.

      Division
      For computers, division is the most complex operation in integer arithmetic.
      The built-in instructions for division, DIV and IDIV are (relatively speaking)
      very slow and have a latency of over 50 clock cycles (on latest crops of NetBurst
      processors). This compares with a latency of less than one cycle for additions
      and subtractions (which can be executed in parallel). For unknown divisors,
      the compiler has no choice but to use DIV. This is usually bad for performance
      but is good for reversers because it makes for readable and straightforward
      code.
         With constant divisors, the situation becomes far more complicated. The
      compiler can employ some highly creative techniques for efficiently imple-
      menting division, depending on the divisor. The problem is that the resulting
      code is often highly unreadable. The following sections discuss reciprocal mul-
      tiplication, which is an optimized division technique.

      Understanding Reciprocal-Multiplications
      The idea with reciprocal multiplication is to use multiplication instead of divi-
      sion in order to implement a division operation. Multiplication is 4 to 6 times

faster than division on IA-32 processors, and in some cases it is possible to
avoid the use of division instructions by using multiplication instructions. The
idea is to multiply the dividend by a fraction that is the reciprocal of the divisor.
For example, if you wanted to divide 30 by 3, you would simply compute the
reciprocal for 3, which is 1 ÷ 3.The result of such an operation is approximately
0.3333333, so if you multiply 30 by 0.3333333, you end up with the correct
result, which is 10.
   Implementing reciprocal multiplication in integer arithmetic is slightly
more complicated because the data type you’re using can only represent inte-
gers. To overcome this problem, the compiler uses fixed-point arithmetic.
   Fixed-point arithmetic enables the representation of fractions and real num-
bers without using a “floating” movable decimal point. With fixed-point arith-
metic, the exponent component (which is the position of the decimal dot in
floating-point data types) is not used, and the position of the decimal dot
remains fixed. This is in contrast to hardware floating-point mechanisms in
which the hardware is responsible for allocating the available bits between the
integral value and the fractional value. Because of this mechanism floating-
point data types can represent a huge range of values, from extremely small
(between 0 and 1) to extremely large (with dozens of zeros before the decimal
point).
   To represent an approximation of a real number in an integer, you define an
imaginary dot within our integer that defines which portion of it represents
the number’s integral value and which portion represents the fractional value.
The integral value is represented as a regular integer, using the number of bits
available to it based on our division. The fractional value represents an
approximation of the number’s distance from the current integral value (for
example, 1) to the next one up (to follow this example, 2), as accurately as pos-
sible with the available number of bits. Needless to say, this is always an
approximation—many real numbers can never be accurately represented. For
example, in order to represent .5, the fractional value would contain
0x80000000 (assuming a 32-bit fractional value). To represent .1, the frac-
tional value would contain 0x20000000.
   To go back to the original problem, in order to multiply a 32-bit dividend by
an integer reciprocal the compiler multiplies the dividend by a 32-bit recipro-
cal. This produces a 64-bit result. The lower 32 bits contain the remainder (also
represented as a fractional value) and the upper 32 bits actually contain the
desired result.
   Table B.1 presents several examples of 32-bit reciprocals used by compilers.
Every reciprocal is used together with a divisor which is always a powers of
two (essentially a right shift, we’re trying to avoid actual division here). Com-
pilers combine right shifts with the reciprocals in order to achieve greater
accuracy because reciprocals are not accurate enough when working with
large dividends.

      Table B.1   Examples of Reciprocal Multiplications in Division

                                                RECIPROCAL
        DIVISOR IN          32-BIT              VALUE (AS A            COMBINED
        SOURCE CODE         RECIPROCAL          FRACTION)              WITH DIVISOR

        3                   0xAAAAAAAB          2/3                    2

        5                   0xCCCCCCCD          4/5                    4

        6                   0xAAAAAAAB          2/3                    4

         Notice that the last digit in each reciprocal is incremented by one. This is
      because the fractional values can never be accurately represented, so the com-
      piler is rounding the fraction upward to obtain an accurate integer result
      (within the given bits).
         Of course, keep in mind that multiplication is also not a trivial operation,
      and multiplication instructions in IA-32 processors can be quite slow (though
      significantly faster than division). Because of this, compilers only use recipro-
      cal when the divisor is not a power of 2. When it is, compilers simply shift
      operands to the right as many times as needed.

      Deciphering Reciprocal-Multiplications
      Reciprocal multiplications are quite easy to detect when you know what to
      look for. The following is a typical reciprocal multiplication sequence:

        mov           ecx, eax
        mov           eax, 0xaaaaaaab
        mul           ecx
        shr           edx, 2
        mov           eax, edx

        DIVIDING VARIABLE DIVIDENDS USING RECIPROCAL MULTIPLICATION?

        There are also optimized division algorithms that can be used for variable
        dividends, where the reciprocal is computed in runtime, but modern IA-32
        implementations provide a relatively high-performance implementation of the
        DIV and IDIV instructions. Because of this, compilers rarely use reciprocal
        multiplication for variable dividends when generating IA-32 code—they simply
        use the DIV or IDIV instructions. The time it would take to compute the
        reciprocal in runtime plus the actual reciprocal multiplication time would be
        longer than simply using a straightforward division.

   This code multiplies ECX by 0xAAAAAAAB, which is equivalent to 0.6666667
(or two-thirds). It then shifts the number by two positions to the right. This
effectively divides the number by 4. The combination of multiplying by two-
thirds and dividing is equivalent to dividing by 6. Notice that the result from
the multiplication is taken from EDX and not from EAX. This is because the
MUL instruction produces a 64-bit result—the most-significant 32-bits are
stored in EDX and the least-significant 32-bits are stored in EAX. You are inter-
ested in the upper 32 bits because that’s the integral value in the fixed-point
representation.
   Here is a slightly more involved example, which adds several new steps to
the sequence:

  mov         ecx, eax
  mov         eax, 0x24924925
  mul         ecx
  mov         eax, ecx
  sub         eax, edx
  shr         eax, 1
  add         eax, edx
  shr         eax, 2

   This sequence is quite similar to the previous example, except that the result
of the multiplication is processed a bit more here. Mathematically, the preced-
ing sequence performs the following:
   y = ((x - x _ sr) ÷ 2 + x _ sr) ÷ 4
   Where x = dividend and sr = 1 ÷ 7 (scaled).
   Upon looking at the formula it becomes quickly evident that this is a divi-
sion by 7. But at first glance, it may seem as if the code following the MUL
instruction is redundant. It would appear that in order to divide by 7 all that
would be needed is to multiply the dividend by the reciprocal. The problem is
that the reciprocal has limited precision. The compiler rounds the reciprocal
upward to the nearest number in order to minimize the magnitude of error
produced by the multiplications. With larger dividends, this accumulated
error actually produces incorrect results. To understand this problem you
must remember that quotients are supposed to be truncated (rounded down-
ward). With upward-rounded reciprocals, quotients will be rounded upward
for some dividends. Therefore, compilers add the reciprocal once and subtract
it once—to eliminate the errors it introduces into the result.

Modulo
Fundamentally, modulo is the same operation as division, except that you take
a different part of the result. The following is the most common and intuitive
method for calculating the modulo of a signed 32-bit integer:

        mov         eax, DWORD PTR [Divisor]
        cdq
        mov         edi, 100
        idiv        edi

         This code divides Divisor by 100 and places the result in EDX. This is the
      most trivial implementation because the modulo is obtained by simply divid-
      ing the two values using IDIV, the processor’s signed division instruction.
      IDIV’s normal behavior is that it places the result of the division in EAX and
      the remainder in EDX, so that code running after this snippet can simply grab
      the remainder from EDX. Note that because IDIV is being passed a 32-bit divi-
      sor (EDI), it will use a 64-bit dividend in EDX:EAX, which is why the CDQ
      instruction is used. It simply converts the value in EAX into a 64-bit value in
      EDX:EAX. For more information on CDQ refer to the type conversions section
      later in this chapter.
         This approach is good for reversers because it is highly readable, but isn’t
      quite the fastest in terms of runtime performance. IDIV is a fairly slow instruc-
      tion—one of the slowest in the entire instruction set. This code was generated
      by the Microsoft compiler.
         Some compilers actually use a multiplication by a reciprocal in order to
      determine the modulo (see the section on division).

      64-Bit Arithmetic
      Modern 32-bit software frequently uses larger-than-32-bit integer data types
      for various purposes such as high-precision timers, high-precision signal pro-
      cessing, and many others. For general-purpose code that is not specifically
      compiled to run on advanced processor enhancements such as SSE, SSE2, and
      SSE3, the compiler combines two 32-bit integers and uses specialized
      sequences to perform arithmetic operations on them. The following sections
      describe how the most common arithmetic operations are performed on such
      64-bit data types.
        When working with integers larger than 32-bits (without the advanced
      SIMD data types), the compiler employs several 32-bit integers to represent
      the full operands. In these cases arithmetic can be performed in different ways,
      depending on the specific compiler. Compilers that support these larger data
      types will include built-in mechanisms for dealing with these data types.
      Other compilers might treat these data types as data structures containing sev-
      eral integers, requiring the program or a library to provide specific code that
      performs arithmetic operations on these data types.

  Most modern compilers provide built-in support for 64-bit data types.
These data types are usually stored as two 32-bit integers in memory, and the
compiler generates special code when arithmetic operations are performed on
them. The following sections describe how the common arithmetic functions
are performed on such data types.

Addition
Sixty-four-bit integers are usually added by combining the ADD instruction
with the ADC (add with carry) instruction. The ADC instruction is very similar
to the standard ADD, with the difference that it also adds the value of the carry
flag (CF) to the result.
   The lower 32 bits of both operands are added using the regular ADD instruc-
tion, which sets or clears CF depending on whether the addition produced a
remainder. Then, the upper 32 bits are added using ADC, so that the result from
the previous addition is taken into account. Here is a quick sample:

  mov          esi, [Operand1_Low]
  mov          edi, [Operand1_High]
  add          eax, [Operand2_Low]
  adc          edx, [Operand2_High]

  Notice in this example that the two 64-bit operands are stored in registers.
Because each register is 32 bits, each operand uses two registers. The first
operand uses ESI for the low part and EDI for the high part. The second
operand uses EAX for the low-part and EDX for the high part. The result ends
up in EDX:EAX.

Subtraction
The subtraction case is essentially identical to the addition, with CF being used
as a “borrow” to connect the low part and the high part. The instructions used
are SUB for the low part (because it’s just a regular subtraction) and SBB for the
high part, because SBB also includes CF’s value in the operation.

  mov          eax, DWORD PTR [Operand1_Low]
  sub          eax, DWORD PTR [Operand2_Low]
  mov          edx, DWORD PTR [Operand1_High]
  sbb          edx, DWORD PTR [Operand2_High]

Multiplication
Multiplying 64-bit numbers is too long and complex an operation for the com-
piler to embed within the code. Instead, the compiler uses a predefined function

      called allmul that is called whenever two 64-bit values are multiplied. This
      function, along with its assembly language source code, is included in the
      Microsoft C run-time library (CRT), and is presented in Listing B.1.

        _allmul PROC NEAR

                 mov     eax,HIWORD(A)
                 mov     ecx,HIWORD(B)
                 or      ecx,eax           ;test for both hiwords zero.
                 mov     ecx,LOWORD(B)
                 jnz     short hard        ;both are zero, just mult ALO and BLO
                 mov     eax,LOWORD(A)
                 mul     ecx
                 ret     16                ; callee restores the stack
        hard:
                 push    ebx
                 mul     ecx             ;eax has AHI, ecx has BLO, so AHI * BLO
                 mov     ebx,eax         ;save result
                 mov     eax,LOWORD(A2)
                 mul     dword ptr HIWORD(B2) ;ALO * BHI
                 add     ebx,eax         ;ebx = ((ALO * BHI) + (AHI * BLO))
                 mov     eax,LOWORD(A2) ;ecx = BLO
                 mul     ecx             ;so edx:eax = ALO*BLO
                 add     edx,ebx         ;now edx has all the LO*HI stuff
                 pop     ebx
                 ret     16

      Listing B.1 The allmul function used for performing 64-bit multiplications in code
      generated by the Microsoft compilers.

         Unfortunately, in most reversing scenarios you might run into this function
      without knowing its name (because it will be an internal symbol inside the
      program). That’s why it makes sense for you to take a quick look at Listing B.1
      to try to get a general idea of how this function works—it might help you iden-
      tify it later on when you run into this function while reversing.

      Division
      Dividing 64-bit integers is significantly more complex than multiplying, and
      again the compiler uses an external function to implement this functionality.
      The Microsoft compiler uses the alldiv CRT function to implement 64-bit
      divisions. Again, alldiv is fully listed in Listing B.2 in order to simply its
      identification when reversing a program that includes 64-bit arithmetic.
